# The Timekeeper and the Scorekeeper

### 18:1
In principle, the timekeeper has the main responsibility for the playing time, the timeouts,
and the suspension time of suspended players.

The scorekeeper has the main responsibility for the team rosters, the score sheet, the
entering of players who arrive after the game has started, and the entering of players
who are not entitled to participate.

Other tasks, such as the control of the number of players and team officials in the
substitution area, and the exit and entry of substituting players, as well as counting the
number of attacks (this decision is regarded as based on their observation of facts) after
treatment given to a player on the court, are regarded as joint responsibilities.

Generally, only the timekeeper (and, when applicable, a delegate from the responsible
federation) should interrupt the game when this becomes necessary.

See also Clarification No. 7 regarding proper procedures for the interventions of the
timekeeper/scorekeeper when fulfilling some of the responsibilities indicated above.

### 18:2
If there is no public scoreboard clock available, then the timekeeper must keep the
‘responsible team official’ for each team informed about how much time has been
played or how much time is left, especially following time-outs.

If there is no scoreboard clock with automatic signal available, the timekeeper assumes
the responsibility for giving the final signal at half-time and at the end of the game (see
2:3).

If the public scoreboard is not capable of displaying also the suspension time (at least
three per team during IHF games), the timekeeper shall display a card on the
timekeeper’s table, showing the expiration time of each suspension, together with the
player’s number.
