# The Team, Substitutions, Equipment, Player Injuries

## The Team

### 4:1
A team consists of up to 14 players.

No more than 7 players may be present on the court at the same time. The remaining
players are substitutes.

A player who is identified as a goalkeeper may become a court player at any time (note,
however, Rule [8:5](#8:5) Comment, 2nd paragraph). Similarly, a court player may become a
goalkeeper at any time as long as he is identified as a goalkeeper (see, however, [4:4](#4:4) and
[4:7](#4:7)).

If a team is playing without a goalkeeper, a maximum number of 7 court players are
allowed to be on the playing court at the same time (see Rules [4:7](#4:7), [6:1](#6:1),
[6:2c](#6:2), [6:3](#6:3), [8:7f](#8:7), [14:1a](#14:1)).

Rules [4:4-4:7](#4:4) are to be applied to substitutions of a goalkeeper for a court player.

A team must have at least 5 players on the court at the start of the game.
The number of players on a team can be increased up to 14, at any time during the
game, including overtime.

The game may continue even if a team is reduced to less than 5 players on the court. It
is for the referees to judge whether and when the game should be permanently
suspended ([17:12](#17:12)).

***Note:***

*The IHF, continental confederations and national federations have the right to apply
deviating regulations in their areas of responsibility regarding the number of players.
However, no more than 16 players are allowed.*

### 4:2
A team is allowed to use a maximum of 4 team officials during the game. These team
officials may not be replaced during the course of the game. One of them must be
designated as the ‘responsible team official’. Only this official is allowed to address the
timekeeper/scorekeeper and, possibly, the referees (see, however, [Clarification No. 3](#3.-team-time-out-(2:10))).

A team official is generally not allowed to enter the court during the game. A violation
of this rule is to be penalised as unsportsmanlike conduct (see [8:7-10](#8:7), [16:1b](#16:1), [16:3e-g](#16:3)
and [16:6c](#16:6)). The game is restarted with a free throw for the opponents (13:1a-b; see,
however, [Clarification No. 7](#7.-intervention-by-the-timekeeper-or-a-delegate-(18:1))).

The ‘responsible team official’ shall ensure that, once the game has started, no other
persons than the (maximum 4) registered team officials and the players who are entitled
to participate (see [4:3](#4:3)) are present in the substitution area. He is also responsible for the
team’s compliance with the Substitution Area Regulations. Violations lead to
progressive punishment for the ‘responsible team official’ ([16:1b](#16:1), [16:3e](#16:3), and [16:6c](#16:6)).

### 4:3
A player or team official is entitled to participate if he is present at the start of the game
and is included in the score sheet.

Players and team officials who arrive after the game has started must obtain their
entitlement to participate from the timekeeper/scorekeeper and must be entered into the
score sheet.

A player who is entitled to participate may, in principle, enter the court through the
team’s own substitution line at any time (see, however, [4:4](#4:4) and [4:6](#4:6)).
The ‘responsible team official’ shall ensure that only players who are entitled to
participate enter the court. A violation is to be penalised as unsportsmanlike conduct by
the ‘responsible team official’ ([13:1a-b](#13:1), [16:1b](#16:1). [16:3d](#16:3), and [16:6c](#16:6); see, however,
[Clarification No. 7](#7.-intervention-by-the-timekeeper-or-a-delegate-(18:1))).

## Player Substitutions

### 4:4
Substitutes may enter the court, at any time and repeatedly (see, however, Rule [2:5](#2:5) and
Rule [4:11](#4:11)), without notifying the timekeeper/scorekeeper, as long as the players they are
replacing have already left the court ([4:5](#4:5)).

The players involved in the substitution shall always leave and enter the court over their
own team’s substitution line ([4:5](#4:5)). These requirements also apply to the substitution of
goalkeepers (see also [4:7](#4:7) and [14:10](#14:10)).

The substitution rules also apply during a time-out (except during a team time-out).

***Comment:***

*The purpose of the concept of the ‘substitution line’ is to ensure fair and orderly substitutions. It is
not intended to cause punishments in other situations, where a player steps over the sideline or
outer goal line in a harmless manner and without any intention of gaining an advantage (e.g.,
getting water or a towel at the bench just beyond the substitution line, or leaving the court in a
sportsmanlike manner when receiving a suspension and crossing the sideline at the bench but just
outside the 15cm line). Tactical and illegal usage of the area outside the court is dealt with
separately in Rule [7:10](#7:10).*

### 4:5 
A faulty substitution shall be penalised with a 2-minute suspension for the guilty player.
If more than one player from the same team is guilty of faulty substitution in the same
situation, only the first player committing an infraction is to be penalised.

The game is restarted with a free-throw for the opponents ([13:1a-b](#13:1); see, however,
[Clarification No. 7](#7.-intervention-by-the-timekeeper-or-a-delegate-(18:1))).

### 4:6 
If an additional player enters the court without a substitution, or if a player illegally
interferes with the game from the substitution area, there shall be a 2-minute suspension
for the player. Thus, the team must be reduced by one player on the court for the next 2
minutes (apart from the fact that the entering additional player must leave the court).

If a player enters the court while serving a 2-minute suspension, he shall be given an
additional 2-minute suspension. This suspension shall begin immediately, so the team
must be further reduced on the court during the overlap between the first and the second
suspension.

The game is in both cases restarted with a free throw for the opponents ([13:1a-b](#13:1); see,
however, [Clarification No. 7](#7.-intervention-by-the-timekeeper-or-a-delegate-(18:1))).

## Equipment

### 4:7 
All the court players on a team must wear identical uniforms. The combinations of
colours and design for the two teams must be clearly distinguishable from each other.
All players used in the goalkeeper position on a team must wear the same colour, a
colour that distinguishes them from the court players of both teams and the
goalkeeper(s) of the opposing team ([17:3](#17:3)).

### 4:8
The players must wear visible numbers that are at least 20 cm high in the back of the
shirt and at least 10cm in the front. The numbers used shall be from 1 to 99. A player
who is switching between the court player and goalkeeper positions must wear the same
number in both positions.

The colour of the numbers must contrast clearly with the colours and design of the shirt.

### 4:9 
The players must wear sports shoes.

It is not permitted to wear objects that could be dangerous to the players or give players
improper advantages. This includes, for instance, head protection, face masks, gloves,
bracelets, watches, rings, visible piercing, necklaces or chains, earrings, glasses without
restraining bands or with solid frames, or any other objects which could be dangerous
([17:3](#17:3)).

Players who do not meet this requirement will not be allowed to take part until they
have corrected the problem.

Flat rings, small earrings and visible piercing may be allowed, as long as they are taped
over in such a way that they are no longer deemed dangerous to players. Headbands,
head scarves and captains’ armlets are allowed, as long as they are made of soft, elastic
material.

The responsible team official confirms by signing the match report / player registration
before the game has been started that all players are correctly equipped. If the referees
observe faulty equipment after the game has been started (according to Rule [4:9](#4:9)), the
responsible team official is to be punished progressively and the player concerned has to
leave the playing court until he has corrected the problem.

If the team has any doubt about the equipment, the responsible team official has to
contact the referees or the delegate before the start of the game (see also [“Guidelines
and Interpretations”, Appendix 2](#appendix-2)).

## Player Injuries

### 4:10
A player who is bleeding or has blood on the body or uniform must leave the court
immediately and voluntarily (through a normal substitution), in order to have the
bleeding stopped, the wound covered, and the body and uniform cleaned off. The player
must not return to the court until this has been done.

A player who does not follow the instructions of the referees in connection with this
provision is deemed guilty of unsportsmanlike conduct ([8:7](#8:7), 16:1b and 16:3d).

### 4:11
In the case of an injury, the referees may give permission (through hand signals no. 15
and 16) for two of the persons who are entitled to participate (see [4:3](#4:3)) to enter the court
during a time-out, for the specific purpose of assisting an injured player from their team.

After receiving medical care on the playing court, the player has to leave the court
immediately. He can only re-enter the court following the third attack of his team
(procedure and exceptions see Clarification No. 8).

Regardless of the counted number of attacks, the player can re-enter the playing court
when the game is continued after the end of a half-time. If the player enters the playing
court too early, he shall be punished according to Rule 4:4-4:6.

***Note:***

*Only national federations are entitled to suspend the regulations of Rule [4:11](#4:11), 2nd paragraph,
in youth categories.*

If additional persons enter the court after two persons have already entered, including
persons from the team not affected, it shall be punished as illegal entry, in the case of a
player under Rule [4:6](#4:6) and 16:3a, and in the case of a team official under Rules [4:2](#4:2),
16:1b, 16:3d and 16:6c. A person who has been permitted to enter the court under Rule
[4:11](#4:11), 1st paragraph, but, instead of assisting the injured player, gives instructions to
players, approaches opponents or referees etc., shall be considered guilty of
unsportsmanlike conduct (16:1b, 16:3d and 16:6c).
