# The Goal Area

### 6:1
Only the goalkeeper is allowed to enter the goal area (see, however, [6:3](#6:3)). The goal area,
which includes the goal-area line, is considered entered when a court player touches it
with any part of the body.

### 6:2
When a court player enters the goal area, the decisions shall be as follows:

- a) goalkeeper throw when a player of the team in possession enters the goal area in
  possession of the ball or enters without the ball but gains an advantage by doing so
  ([12:1](#12:1));
- b) free throw when a court player of the defending team enters the goal area and gains an
  advantage, but without destroying a chance of scoring (13:1b; see also 8:7f);
- c) 7-metre throw when a court player of the defending team enters the goal area and
  because of this destroys a clear chance of scoring (14:1a).

  For purposes of this rule, the concept “entering the goal area” does not mean just
  touching the goal-area line, but clearly stepping into the goal area.

### 6:3
Entering the goal area is not penalised when:

- a) a player enters the goal area after playing the ball, as long as this does not create a
  disadvantage for the opponents;
- b)- a player from one of the teams enters the goal area without the ball and does not gain
  an advantage by doing so.

### 6:4
The ball is considered to be ‘out of play’ when the goalkeeper controls the ball in the
goal area ([12:1](#12:1)). The ball must be put back into play through a goalkeeper throw ([12:2](#12:2)).

### 6:5
The ball remains in play, while it is rolling on the floor inside the goal area. It is in the
possession of the goalkeeper’s team and only the goalkeeper may touch it. The
goalkeeper may pick it up, which brings it out of play, and then put it back into play, in
accordance with Rules [6:4](#6:4) and 12:1-2 (see, however, 6:7b). It leads to a free throw
(13:1a) if the ball is touched by a teammate of the goalkeeper while it is rolling (see,
however, 14:1a, in conjunction with Clarification 6c), and the game is continued with a
goalkeeper throw (12:1 (III)) if it is touched by an opponent.

The ball is out of play, as soon as it is lying on the floor in goal area (12:1 (II)). It is in
the possession of the goalkeeper’s team and only the goalkeeper may touch it. The
goalkeeper must put it back into play in accordance with [6:4](#6:4) and [12:2](#12:2) (see, however,
6:7b). It remains a goalkeeper throw if the ball is touched by any other player of either
team ([12:1](#12:1) 2nd paragraph, [13:3](#13:3)).

It is permitted to touch the ball when it is in the air over the goal area, as long as it is in
conformity with Rules [7:1](#7:1) and [7:8](#7:8).

### 6:6
Play shall continue (through a goalkeeper throw according to 6:4-5) if a player of the
defending team touches the ball when in the act of defence, and the ball is caught by the
goalkeeper or comes to rest in the goal area.

## 6:7
If a player plays the ball into his own goal area, the decisions shall be as follows:

- a) goal if the ball enters the goal;
- b) free throw if the ball comes to a rest in the goal area, or if the goalkeeper touches the
  ball and it does not enter the goal (13:1a-b);
- c) throw-in if the ball goes out over the outer goal line (11:1);
- d) play continues if the ball passes through the goal area back into the playing area,
  without being touched by the goalkeeper.

## 6:8
A ball that returns from the goal area out into the playing area remains in play.
