# The Goalkeeper Throw

### 12:1
A goalkeeper throw is awarded when:
- a) A player of the opposing team has entered the goal area in
violation of Rule [6:2a](#6:2);

- b) The opposing team has scored a goal;

- c) The goalkeeper controls the ball in his goal area (Rule [6:6](#6:6));

- d) The ball crosses the outer goal line, after having been touched last
by the goalkeeper or a player of the opposing team.

This means that in all these situations the ball is considered out of play
and the game is resumed with a goalkeeper throw (Rule [13:3](#13:3)) if there
is a violation after a goalkeeper throw has been awarded and before it
has been executed.

Rule [13:3](#13:3) applies if there is a violation of the rules on the part of the
goalkeeper’s team after a goalkeeper throw has been awarded and
before it has been executed.

### 12:2
The goalkeeper throw is taken by the goalkeeper, without whistle
signal from the referee (see, however, Rule [15:3b](#15:3)), from the goal area
out over the goal-area line.

The goalkeeper throw is considered to have been taken when the ball
thrown by the goalkeeper has crossed the goal-area line.

The players of the other team are allowed to be immediately outside
the goal-area line, but they are not allowed to touch the ball until it has
crossed the line (Rule [15:7](#15:7), 3rd paragraph).

***Comment:***
Goalkeeper throw during a goalkeeper's substitution: The goalkeeper throw
has to be always carried out by the leaving goalkeeper.

He is only allowed to leave the court after carrying out the goalkeeper
throw.

### 12:3 
The goalkeeper must not touch the ball again after a goalkeeper
throw, until it has touched another player (Rules [5:7](#5:7), [13:1a](#13:1)).
