# The Free Throw

## Free-Throw Decision

### 13:1
In principle, the referees interrupt the game and have it restarted with
a free throw for the opponents when:
- a) The team in possession of the ball commits a violation of the rules
that must lead to a loss of possession (see Rules [4:4](#4:4), [4:6](#4:6), [4:13](#4:13),
[4:14](#4:14), [5:6-11](#5:6), [6:2b](#6:2b), [6:4](#6:4), [6:8b](#6:8b), [7:2-4](#7:2), [7:7-8](#7:7), [7:10](#7:10), [8:8](#8:8), [11:4](#11:4), [12:3](#12:3),
[13:9](#13:9), [14:5-7](#14:5) and [15:2-5](#15:2)).

- b) The defending team commits a violation of the rules that causes
the team in possession of the ball to lose it (see Rules [4:4](#4:4), [4:6](#4:6),
[4:13](#4:13), [4:14](#4:14), [6:2b](#6:2), [6:4](#6:4), [6:8b](#6:8), [7:8](#7:8), [8:8](#8:8), [13:7](#13:7)).

### 13:2
The referees should allow continuity in the game by refraining from
interrupting the game prematurely with a free-throw decision.

This means that, under Rule [13:1a](#13:1), the referees should not call a free
throw if the defending team gains possession of the ball immediately
after the violation committed by the attacking team.

Similarly, under Rule [13:1b](#13:1), the referees should not intervene until
and unless it is clear that the attacking team has lost possession of
the ball or is unable to continue their attack, due to the violation
committed by the defending team.

If a personal punishment is to be given because of the rules violation,
then the referees may decide to interrupt the game immediately, if this
does not cause a disadvantage for the opponents of the team
committing the violation. Otherwise the punishment should be delayed
until the existing situation is over.

Rule [13:2](#13:2) does not apply in the case of infringements against Rules
[4:3](#4:3), [4:4](#4:4), [4:6](#4:6), [4:13](#4:13), [4:14](#4:14) where the game shall be interrupted
immediately, through the intervention of the timekeeper.

### 13:3
If a violation that would normally lead to a free throw under Rule [13:1](#13:1)
takes place when the ball is out of play, then the game is restarted
with the throw that corresponds to the reason for the existing
interruption.

### 13:4
In addition to the situations indicated in Rule [13:1a-b](#13:1), a free throw is
also used as the way of restarting the game in certain situations
where the game is interrupted (i.e. when the ball is in play), even
though no violation of the rules has occurred:
- a) If one team is in possession of the ball at the time of the
interruption, this team shall retain possession;

- b) If neither team is in possession of the ball, then the team that last
had possession shall be given possession again;

- c) When the game is interrupted because the ball touched a fixture
above the court, the team which did not last touch the ball shall be
given possession.

The “Advantage Rule” according to Rule [13:2](#13:2) does not apply in
situations indicated in Rule [13:4](#13:4).
  
### 13:5
If there is a free-throw decision against the team that is in possession
of the ball when the referee whistles, then the player who has the ball
at that moment must immediately drop it or put it down at the spot
where he is (Rule [16:2d](#16:2)).

## Free-Throw Execution

### 13:6
When a free throw is taken, the players of the attacking team are not
allowed to position themselves closer than 1 metre from the goal-area
line of the opponents before the free throw has been taken (Rule
[15:1](#15:1)).

### 13:7
When the free throw is being taken, the opponents must remain at a
distance of at least 1 metre from the thrower.

### 13:8
The free throw is normally taken without any whistle signal from the
referee (see, however, Rule [15:3b](#15:3)) and, in principle, from the place 
where the infraction occurred. The following are exceptions to this
principle:

In the situations described under Rule [13:4](#13:4) a-b, the free throw is
taken, after whistle signal, in principle from the place where the ball
was at the time of the interruption. In case of Rule [13:4c](#13:4), the free
throw is taken, also after whistle signal, in principle from the place
below where the ball touched the fixture.

If a referee or technical delegate (from IHF or Continental/National
Federation) interrupts the game because of an infringement on the
part of a player or team official of the defending team, and this results
in a verbal warning or a personal punishment, then the free throw
should be taken from the place where the ball was when the game
was interrupted, if this is a more favourable location than the position
where the infringement took place.

The same exception as in the previous paragraph applies if a
timekeeper interrupts the game because of a faulty substitution or
illegal entry under Rules [4:3-4](#4:3), [4:6](#4:6), [4:13-14](#4:13).

As indicated in Rule [7:10](#7:10), free throws called because of passive play
shall be taken from the place where the ball was when the game was
interrupted.
Notwithstanding the basic principles and procedures stated in the
preceding paragraphs, a free throw can never be taken inside the
throwing team’s own goal area. In any situation where the location
indicated is inside the goal area, the location for the execution must
be moved to the nearest spot immediately outside the goal area.
If the correct position of the free throw is nearer than one metre from
the defending team goal-area line, then the execution must take place
at least one metre away from the goal-area line.

### 13:9 
Once a player from the team that received the free throw is in the
correct position for taking the throw, with the ball in hand, he must not
put it down on the sand and pick it up again, or bounce it and catch it
again (Rule [13:1a](#13:1)).