# The 6-Meter Throw

## 6-Metre Decision

### 14:1
A 6-metre throw is awarded when:
- a) A clear chance of scoring is destroyed anywhere on the court by a
player or a team official of the opposing team;

- b) There is an unwarranted whistle signal at the time of a clear
chance of scoring;

- c) A clear chance of scoring is destroyed through the interference of
someone not participating in the game (except when Rule [9:1](#9:1),
Comment, applies).

For the definition of “clear chance of scoring” see [Clarification No.7](#7.-definition-of-a-clear-chance-of-scoring”) .

### 14:2
If an attacking player retains full control of ball and body despite a
violation as in [14:1a](#14:1), there is no reason to give a 6-metre throw, even
if thereafter the player fails to utilize the clear scoring chance.

Whenever there is a potential 6-metre decision, the referees should
always hold off on intervening until they can clearly determine if a 6-
metre decision is indeed justified and necessary. If the attacking
player proceeds to score a goal despite the illegal interference from
the defenders, then there is obviously no reason to give a 6-metre
throw. Conversely, if it becomes apparent that the player really has
lost ball or body control because of the violation, so that a clear
chance no longer exists, then a 6-metre throw is to be given.

### 14:3
When awarding a 6-metre throw, the referees must give a time-out
(Rule [2:14b](#2:14)).

### 14:4
If a goal is scored by a 6-metre throw, 2 points are awarded (Rule
[9:3](#9:3)).

## 6-Metre Execution

### 14:5
The 6-metre throw is to be taken as a shot on goal, within 3 seconds
after a whistle signal form the court referee (Rule [13:1a](#13:1)).

### 14:6
The player who is taking the 6-metre throw must not touch or cross
the 6-metre line before the ball has left his hand (Rule [6:2a](#6:2)).

### 14:7
The ball must not be played again by the thrower or a teammate
following the execution of a 6-metre throw, until it has touched an
opponent or the goal (Rule [13:1a](#13:1)).

### 14:8
When a 6-metre throw is being executed, the goalkeeper and the
other opponents of the thrower must remain at least 1 metre from the
thrower until the ball has left the thrower’s hand. If they do not so, the
6-metre throw will be retaken if it does not result in a goal.

### 14:9
It is not permitted to change goalkeepers once the thrower is ready
to take the 6-metre throw, standing in the correct position with the ball
hand. Any attempt to make a substitution in this situation is to be penalized as unsportsmanlike conduct (Rules [8:4](#8:4), [16:1d](#16:1) and [16:2c](#16:2)).

### 14:10
For the sake of Fair Play, no kind of throwers’ obstruction (with arm movements, sounds etc.) is allowed to the players standing next or near to the thrower.
