# General Instructions for the Execution of the Throws (Throw-In, Goalkeeper Throw, Free Throw, 6-Meter Throw)

### 15:1
The ball must be in the hand of the thrower before a throw is
executed.

All players must be in the positions prescribed for the throw in
question. The players must remain in their correct positions until the
ball has left the hand of the thrower.

An incorrect initial position is to be corrected (see, however, Rule [15:7](#15:7)).

### 15:2
Except in the case of the goalkeeper throw, the thrower must have
one part of a foot in constant contact with the sand when a throw is
taken (Rule [13:1a](#13:1)). The other foot may be lifted and put down
repeatedly.

### 15:3
The referee must blow the whistle for the restart:
- a) Always in the case of 6-metre throw;

- b) In the case of a throw-in, goalkeeper throw or free throw:
   * For a restart after a time-out;

   * For a restart with a free throw under Rule [13:4](#13:4);

   * When there has been a delay in the execution;

   * After a correction of the player positions;

   * After a verbal warning.
   
After the whistle signal, the thrower must play the ball within 3
seconds (Rule [13:1a](#13:1)).

### 15:4
A throw is considered taken when the ball has left the hand of the
thrower (see, however, Rule [12:2](#12:2)).

The ball may not be handed over to or touched by a teammate of the
thrower when the throw is being taken (Rule [13:1a](#13:1)).

### 15:5
The thrower must not touch the ball again until it has touched another
player or the goal (Rule [13:1a](#13:1)) (except for goalkeeper throw, see Rule
[12:3](#12:3)).

### 15:6
A goal may be scored directly from any throw, except in the case of a
goalkeeper throw, where an “own goal” is not possible (Rule [12:2](#12:2),
however, see Rule [6:2](#6:2)), and a referee throw (because it is executed
by the referee).

### 15:7
Incorrect positions on the part of the defending players in connection
with the execution of throw-in or free throw must not be corrected by
the referees, unless the attacking players are put at a disadvantage
by taking the throw immediately. If there is a disadvantage, then the
positions are to be corrected (Rule [15:3b](#15:3)).

If the referee blows his whistle for a throw to be taken, despite
incorrect positions on the part of defending players, then those
players are fully entitled to intervene.

A player is to be suspended if he delays or interferes with the
execution of a throw by the opponents by standing too close or
through other infractions (Rule [16:2e](#16:2)).