# The Punishments

## Suspension

### 16:1
A suspension **can** be given for:
- a) Fouls and similar infractions against an opponent (Rules [5:5](#5:5) and
[8:2](#8:2)), which do not fall under the category of “punished
progressively” according to Rule [8:3](#8:3);

- b) Fouls which are to be punished progressively (Rule [8:3](#8:3));

- c) Infractions when the opponents are executing a formal throw (Rule
[15:7](#15:7));

- d) Unsportsmanlike conduct by a player or team official (Rule [8:4](#8:4)).

### 16:2
A suspension **must** be given:
- a) For a faulty substitution or illegal entering of the court (Rules [4:13-14](#4:13));

- b) For repeated fouls of the type that they are to be punished
progressively (Rule [8:3](#8:3));

- c) For repeated unsportsmanlike conduct by a player, on the court or
outside the court (Rule [8:4](#8:4));

- d) For failure to drop or put the ball down when a free-throw decision
is taken against the team which is in possession of the ball (Rule [13:5](#13:5));

- e) For repeated infractions when the opponents are executing a
formal throw (Rule [15:7](#15:7));

- f) As a consequence of a disqualification of a player or team official during the playing time (Rule [16:8](#16:8), 2nd paragraph);

- g) To the “responsible team official” if a player who is not entitled to
participate enters the court or more than the registered team
officials and players are present in the substitution area after the
start of the game;

- h) If a team official enters the court as an additional person in case of
a player's injury;

- i) If a team official enters the court in case of a player's injury and
instead of assisting the injured player, gives instructions to players,
approaches opponents or referees.

***Comment:***

It is not possible to give the officials of a team more than one suspension in
total. When a suspension is called against a team official, he is allowed to
remain in the substitution area and carry out his functions. However the
team's strength on court is reduced until the next turnover between the two
teams.

### 16:3
The referee shall clearly indicate the suspension to the guilty player
and to the timekeeper/scorekeeper through the prescribed hand
signal ([Hand Signal No. 12](#12---suspension)).

### 16:4
The suspended player is not allowed to participate in the game during
his suspension, and the team is not allowed to replace him on the
court.

The suspension begins, when the play is restarted with a whistle
signal.

The suspended player can be replaced or is allowed to enter the
playing court as soon as there has been a turnover between the two
teams (see Rule 16, Comment 2).

### 16:5
The second suspension of a player results in disqualification.

In principle, disqualification resulting from two suspensions is only
effective for the remainder of the playing time (Rule 16, Comment 3)
and it has to be regarded as a referee decision based on facts (such
disqualifications shall not be mentioned in the score sheet).

## Disqualification

### 16:6
A disqualification **must** be given for:
- a) Seriously unsportsmanlike conduct;

- b) The second (or subsequent) occasion of unsportsmanlike conduct
by any one of the players or officials of a team (Rule [8:4](#8:4));

- c) Fouls which endanger the opponent’s health (Rule [8:5](#8:5));

- d) Fouls of the goalkeeper, leaving his goal area during a “Shoot-out”
and endangering the health of the opponent (Rule [8:5](#8:5): Actions
which are clearly directed at the body of the opponent and are not
aimed at playing the ball);

- e) Seriously unsportsmanlike conduct by a player or a team official,
on or outside the court (Rule [8:6](#8:6));

- f) An assault by a player outside the playing time, i.e. before the
game or during an intermission (Rules [8:7](#8:7), [16:12b,d](#16:12));

- g) An assault by a team official (Rule [8:7](#8:7));

- h) A second suspension to the same player (Rule [16:5](#16:5));

- i) Repeated unsportsmanlike conduct by a player or team official
during an intermission (Rule [16:12d](#16:12)).
  
### 16:7
After calling a time-out, the referees shall clearly indicate the
disqualification to the guilty player or official and to the
timekeeper/scorekeeper by holding up a red card. ([Hand Signal No.
13](#13---disqualification); the red card should measure about 9x12 centimetres).

## 16:8
A disqualification of a player or team official is always for the entire
remainder of the playing time. The player or official must leave the
court and the substitution area immediately. After leaving, the player
or official is not allowed to have any form of contact with the team.

A disqualification of a player or a team official always reduces the
number of players or officials which is available to the team (except as
mentioned in Rule 16.12 b).

The team, however, is allowed to increase the number of players on
the court again after a turnover between the teams (see Rule 16,
Comment 2).

### 16:9
A disqualification (except because of the second suspension - Rule
[16:6h](#16:6)) must be explained by the referees in the score sheet to the
relevant authorities and leads to a (minimum) one match suspension
for the guilty player/team official.

### 16:10
If a goalkeeper or court player during the “Shoot-out” is punished
because of unsportsmanlike or seriously unsportsmanlike conduct,
this leads to a disqualification of the player

## More than one violation in the same situation

### 16:11
If a player or team official is guilty of more than one violation,
simultaneously or in direct sequence, before the game has been
restarted, and these violations warrant different punishments, then in
principle, only the most severe one of these punishments shall be
given.

This is always the case when one of the violations is an assault.

## Infractions outside the playing time

### 16:12
Unsportsmanlike conduct, seriously unsportsmanlike conduct or an
assault on the part of a player or team official taking place on the
premises where a game is played but outside the playing time, shall
be punished as follows:

**Before the game:**
- a) A verbal warning shall be given in the case of unsportsmanlike
conduct (Rule [16:1d](#16:1));

- b) A disqualification shall be given in the case of seriously
unsportsmanlike conduct or assault (Rule [16:6](#16:6)), but the team is
allowed to start with 10 players and 4 officials.

**During an intermission:**
- c) A verbal warning shall be given in the case of unsportsmanlike
conduct (Rule [16:1d](#16:1));

- d) A disqualification shall be given in the case of repeated or
seriously unsportsmanlike conduct or in the case of an assault 
(Rule [16:6](#16:6)). Rule [16:2c-d](#16:2) applicable during the playing time shall
not apply in the case of repeated unsportsmanlike conduct.

After a disqualification during an intermission the team is allowed to
continue on the court in full strength.

**After the game:**
- e) A written report.

***Comment 1: The playing time***

The situations described in Rules [16:1](#16:1), [16:2](#16:2) and [16:6](#16:6) generally include the
infractions caused during the playing time.
The playing time includes the “time-outs”, the “Golden Goal” and the
“Shoot-out” but not the breaks.

***Comment 2: The turnover***

The term “turnover” is to be used to signify that possession of the ball has
passed from one team to the other.

Exceptions and clarifications:
- a) At the beginning of the second period, a “Golden Goal” and the “Shootout”, suspended players may be substituted or allowed to re-enter the
playing court.
- b) If there is a delayed suspension in an advantage situation:
The suspension starts at the moment the sanction is imposed, i.e. as
soon as the advantage situation has ended and the corresponding
decision has been taken.

***Comment 3:***

“Effective until the end of the match” (Rule [16:5](#16:5)) includes the “Golden Goal”
and the “Shoot-out”.

***Comment 4: The goalkeeper’s behaviour outside the goal area***

The goalkeeper is fully responsible for any contact with an opponent
outside his goal area. That practically means that during any contact where
the attacking player has no chance to see (or avoid) the goalkeeper, a
respective throw (6-metre throw if there is a lost clear chance of scoring)
and progressive punishment will be called. If the incident occurred during
the Shoot-out, a 6-metre throw and a disqualification of the goalkeeper will
be called.

On the contrary (if the attacking player has sufficient time and space to see
and avoid the goalkeeper) a free throw (offensive foul) in favour of the
goalkeeper’s team will be awarded.

***Comment 5: The goalkeeper’s behaviour inside the goal area***

If a goalkeeper “jumps” against an opponent who is trying to score not
vertically, even for scaring the opponent, both a 6-metre-throw and a
suspension must be awarded. If the goalkeeper is causing a physical
contact against the opponent, both, a 6-metre throw and a disqualification
must be awarded. The defending goalkeeper always bears the
responsibility of this kind of action.
