# The Referees

### 17:1
Two referees with equal authority shall be in charge of each game.
They are assisted by a timekeeper and a scorekeeper.

### 17:2
The referees monitor the conduct of the players from the moment
they enter the premises until they leave.

### 17:3
The referees are responsible for inspecting the playing court, the
goals and the balls before the game starts; they decide which balls
will be used (Rules [1](#1), [3:1](#3:1)).

The referees also establish the presence of both teams in proper
uniforms. They check the score sheet and the equipment of the
players. They ensure that the number of players and officials in the
substitution area is within the limits, and they establish the presence
and identity of the “responsible team official” for each team. Any
discrepancies must be corrected (Rules [4:2-3](#4:2), [4:8-10](#4:8)).

### 17:4
The coin toss is undertaken by one of the referees in the presence of
the second referee and the “responsible team official” for each team,
or a team official or player on behalf of the “responsible team
official”.

### 17:5
At the start of the game, one referee positions himself outside the
sideline on the opposite side of the timekeeper table. The official
clock starts on his whistle signal (Rule [2:5](#2:5)).
The second referee positions himself in the centre of the playing
court. After the whistle signal, he starts the game with a referee
throw (Rules [2:2](#2:2), [10:1-2](#10:1)).
The referees must change ends with each other from time to time
during the game.

### 17:6
The referees position themselves in a way they can overview the
substitution areas of both teams (Rules [17:11](#17:11), [18:1](#18:1)).

### 17:7
In principle, the entire game shall be conducted by the same referees.
It is their responsibility to ensure that the game is played in
accordance with the rules, and they must penalize any infractions
(see, however, Rules [13:2](#13:2), [14:2](#14:2)).

If one of the referees becomes unable to finish the game, the second
referee will continue the game alone. (For IHF and Continental
Events, this situation is handled in accordance with the applicable
regulations.)

### 17:8
If both referees whistle for an infraction and agree about which team
should be penalized but have different opinions as to the severity of
the punishment, then the most severe punishment shall be given.

### 17:9
- a) If both referees have different opinions on the awarding of points
after a team has scored, a joint decision will apply (see
Comment).
- b) If both referees whistle for an infraction or the ball has left the
court and the two referees show different opinions as to which
team should have possession, then the joint decision will apply
(see Comment).

A time-out is obligatory. Following the consultation between the
referees, they give clear hand signals and the game is restarted after
a whistle signal (Rules [2:8f](#2:8), [15:3b](#15:3)).

***Comment:***

The referees reach a joint decision by consulting each other briefly. If they
do not manage to reach a joint decision then the opinion of the court referee
will prevail.

### 17:10
Both referees observe and control the score, the playing time and
the result of the game. They are responsible for controlling the
playing time. If there is any doubt about the accuracy of timekeeping,
the referees reach a joint decision (see also Rule 17:9, Comment).

### 17:11 
The referees control, with support of the timekeeper/scorekeeper,
the entry and the exit of the substitutes (Rules [17:6](#17:6), [18:1](#18:1)).

### 17:12
The referees are responsible for ensuring after the game that the
score sheet is completed in a correct way.

Disqualifications of the type indicated in Rule [16:8](#16:8) must be explained
in the score sheet.

### 17:13
Decisions made by the referees, including those based on delegates’
recommendations, on the basis of their observations of facts or their
judgments are final.

Appeals can be lodged only against decisions that are not in
conformity with the rules.

During the game, only the respective “responsible team officials” are entitled to address the referees.


### 17:14
The referees have the right to suspend a game temporarily or
permanently.

Every effort must be made to continue the game, before a decision is
taken to suspend it permanently.
