# The Timekeeper and the Scorekeeper

### 18:1
In principle, the timekeeper controls the playing time and the timeouts.

Generally, only the timekeeper (and, when applicable, one or two
delegates) should interrupt the game when this becomes necessary.

Simultaneously, the scorekeeper has the main responsibility for
keeping the score, the team rosters, the score sheet, the entering of
players who arrive after the game has started and the entering of
players who are not entitled to participate.

Other tasks, such as the control of the number of players and team
officials in the substitution area, are regarded as joint responsibilities.

Both support the referees in controlling the substitutions (Rules [17:6](#17:6), [17:11](#17:11)).

See also [Clarification No. 8](#8.-interruption-by-the-timekeeper) regarding proper procedures for the
interventions of the timekeeper/scorekeeper when fulfilling some of the responsibilities indicated above.

***Comment:***
During IHF, Continental or National Championships the task distribution can be organized in another way.

### 18:2
If there is no public scoreboard clock available, then the timekeeper
must keep the “responsible team official” for each team informed
about how much time has been played or how much time is left,
especially following time-outs.

If there is no scoreboard clock with automatic signal available, the
timekeeper assumes the responsibility for giving the final signal at
half-time and at the end of the game (see Rule [2:9](#2:9), Comment).

When a player is suspended, the scorekeeper confirms this to the
player and the referees by holding up a card. The card shows “1” for
a player’s first suspension and “2” for the second suspension.
