# Start of the Game, Playing Time, Final Signal, Time-out and Team Time-out

## Start of the game

### 2:1
Before the match the referees undertake a coin toss in order to
determine the choice of ends and substitution areas.
The winning team shall then choose either one of the ends of the
court or the respective side of the substitution area. The other team
makes its choice in accordance with the first team’s decision.
After the half-time break the teams change ends. They do not change
the substitution areas.

### 2:2
Each period of the game, and also the “Golden Goal“, begins with a
referee throw (Rule [10:1-2](#10:1)) after a whistle signal from the referees (Rule [2:5](#2:5)).

### 2:3
The court players position themselves anywhere in the playing area.

## Playing Time

### 2:4
The game consists of two periods, which are scored separately. Each
period lasts 10 minutes (but see Rules [2:6](#2:6), [2:8](#2:8) and [4:2](#4:2)). The intermission lasts 5 minutes.

### 2:5
The playing time (execution of referee throw and start of the clock) begins with a referee’s whistle (Rule [2:2](#2:2)).

### 2:6
If the score is even at the end of a period, the “Golden Goal” is used,
(Rule [9:7](#9:7)). Play restarts with a referee throw (Rule [10](#10)).
The winner of each period is awarded one point.

### 2:7
If both periods are won by the same team, this team is the overall winner, with the score 2-0.

### 2:8
If each team wins a period, the result is a tie. As there must always be
a winner, the “Shoot-out” is used (Rule [9](#9)).

### Final Signal

### 2:9
The playing time ends with the automatic final signal from the public
clock or from the timekeeper. If no such signal comes, the referee
whistles to indicate that the playing time is over (Rules [17:10](#17:10), [18:1](#18:1), [18:2](#18:2)).

***Comment:***
If a public clock with an automatic signal is not available,the timekeeper
shall use a table clock or a stopwatch and end the game with a final signal.
(Rule [18:2](#18:2)).
If a public clock is used, it should be set to run from 0 to 10.

### 2:10
Infractions and unsportsmanlike conduct that take place before or
simultaneously with the final signal (for half-time or end of game) are
to be punished, also if this cannot be done until after the signal. The
referees end the game only after the necessary free throw or 6-metre
throw has been taken and its immediate result has been established ([Clarification No. 3](#3.-free-throw-execution-after-the-final-signal)).

### 2:11
The throw must be retaken, if the final signal (for half-time or end of
the game) sounds precisely when a free throw or a 6-metre throw is
being executed or when the ball is already in the air. The immediate
result of the retaken throw is to be established before the referees end
the game.

### 2:12
Players and team officials remain subject to personal punishment for
infractions or unsportsmanlike conduct which take place during the
execution of a free throw or a 6-metre throw-in the circumstances as
described in Rule [2:10-11](#2:10). An infraction during the execution of such a throw cannot, however, lead to a free throw in the opposite
direction.

### 2:13
If the referees determine that the timekeeper has given the final signal
(for half-time or end of game) too early, they must keep the players on
the court and play the remaining time.
The team that was in possession of the ball at the time of the
premature signal will remain in possession when the game resumes.
If the ball was out of play, then the game is restarted with a throw that
corresponds to the situation. If the ball was in play, then the game is
restarted with a free throw in accordance with Rule [13:4a-b](#13:4).
If the first period of a game has been terminated too late, the second
period must last 10 minutes because each period is scored
separately.
If the second period of a game has been terminated too late, then the referees are no longer in a position to change anything.

## Time-out

### 2:14
The referees decide when and for how long the playing time is to be
interrupted (“time-out”).
In the following situations, a time-out is obligatory:
* a) Suspension or disqualification of a player

* b) 6-metre throws

* c) Team time-out

* d) Whistle signal from the timekeeper or the technical delegate

* e) Consultations between the referees in accordance with Rule [17:9](#17:9)

* f) Suspension or disqualification of team official
Apart from the above-indicated situations, where a time-out is
obligatory, the referees are expected to use their judgment regarding
the need for time-outs also in other situations.

However, in the case of obligatory time-outs where the game has
been interrupted by a whistle signal from the timekeeper or the delegate, the timekeeper is required to stop the official clock
immediately, without awaiting a confirmation from the referees.
Some typical situations where time-outs are not obligatory but
nevertheless tend to be given in normal circumstances are:
* a) A player seems to be injured.

* b) A team is clearly wasting time, e.g. when the team is delaying the
execution of a formal throw, when a player is throwing the ball
away or is not releasing it.

* c) External influences, e.g. the court lines must be reattached.

***Comment:***
A whistle signal from the timekeeper/delegate effectively stops the game.
Even if the referees (and the players) did not immediately realize that the
game has been stopped, any action on the court after whistle signal is
invalid.

This means that if a goal was scored after the whistle signal from the table,
the “goal” must be disallowed. Similarly, a decision to award a throw to a
team (any throw) is also invalid. The game shall instead be restarted in the
manner that corresponds to the situation that existed when the
timekeeper/delegate whistled.

However, any personal punishment given by the referees between the time
of the whistle from the table and the time that the referees stop the action
remains valid. This applies regardless of the type of the violation and
regardless of the punishment.

### 2:15 
Infractions during a time-out have the same consequences as
infractions during the playing time (Rule [16:12, Comment 1](#16:12)).

### 2:16 
The referees give the timekeeper a signal when the clock is to be
stopped in connection with a time-out.
The interruption of the playing time is to be indicated to the
timekeeper through three short blasts of the whistle and [Hand Signal No. 14](#14---time-out).
The whistle must always be blown to indicate the restart of the game
after a time-out (Rule [15:3b](#15:3)). With this whistle the timekeeper starts the clock.

## Team time-out

### 2:17 
Each team has the right to receive a one-minute team time-out in
each half of the regular playing time.

A team official of the team that wishes to request a team time-out
must do so by showing clearly a green card. Therefore he goes to the
middle of the sideline and holds up the “green card” in a clearly visible
manner, so that it is immediately recognizable for the timekeeper.
(The green card shall measure about 30x20 centimetres and must
have a large “T” on each side.)

A team may request their team time-out only when it has possession
of the ball (when the ball is in play or during an interruption). Provided
that the team does not lose possession of the ball before the
timekeeper has time to whistle (in which case the team time-out will
not be allowed), the team will be granted the team time-out
immediately.

The timekeeper then interrupts the game by blowing the whistle, gives
the [Hand Signal for Time-out (No. 14)](#14---time-out) and points with a stretched arm
at the team that requested the team time-out. The green card is
placed in the sand in the middle of the sideline and about 1 metre
outside it by the team official. It remains there during the rest of the playing time of the period concerned.

The referees give a time-out and the timekeeper stops the clock. The referees acknowledge the team time-out and the timekeeper starts a separate clock controlling the duration of the team time-out. The
scorekeeper enters the time of the team time-out and the period in the score sheet for the team that requested it.

During the team time-out, the players and officials remain in their
substitution area or on the court. The referees stay in the centre of the
court, but one of them may briefly go to the timekeeper’s table for
consultation.

Infractions during team time-out have the same consequences as
infractions during playing time. It is irrelevant in this context whether the players concerned are on or off the court. Under Rules [8:4](#8:4), [16:1d](#16:1)
and [16:2c](#16:2)., a suspension may be given for unsportsmanlike conduct.
After 50 seconds the timekeeper gives an acoustic signal indicating
that the game is to be continued in 10 seconds.

The teams are obliged to be ready to resume play when the team time-out expires.

The game is restarted with the throw that corresponds to the situation
that existed when the team time-out was granted or, if the ball was in
play, with a free throw for the team requesting the team time-out from
the place where the ball was at the time of the interruption.

When the referee blows the whistle, the timekeeper starts the clock.

***Comment:***
“Possession of the ball” also includes situations where the game has to be
continued with a goalkeeper throw, a throw-in, a free throw or a 6-metre
throw.
“Ball in play” means that the player has contact with the ball (holding the
ball in his hands, shooting, catching or passing the ball to a teammate) or
that the team is in possession of the ball.
