# The Team, Substitutions, Equipment

## The Team

### 4:1
Beach handball games and tournaments can be organized for male,
female and mixed teams.

### 4:2
In principle a team consists of up to 10 players. At least 6 players
must be present at the beginning of the game. If the number of
players eligible to play drops below 4, the game is discontinued and
the other team is deemed the winner of the match.

### 4:3
A maximum of 4 players per team (3 court players and 1 goalkeeper)
may be on the playing court. The remaining players are substitutes
who remain in their own substitution area.

### 4:4
A player or team official is entitled to participate if he is present at the
start of the game and is included in the score sheet.

Players/team officials who arrive after the game has started must
obtain their entitlement to participate from the timekeeper/
scorekeeper and must be entered in the score sheet.

A player who is entitled to participate may, in principle, enter the court
through the team‘s own substitution line at any time (see, however, Rule [4:13](#4:13)).

The “responsible team official” shall ensure that only players who are
entitled to participate enter the court. A violation is to be penalized as
unsportsmanlike conduct by the “responsible team official”.

### 4:5 
During the whole match, each must have one of the players on the
court designated as goalkeeper. A player who is designated as
goalkeeper may at any time take on the role of court player. Likewise
a court player can take over the function of the goalkeeper (see,
however, Rule [4:8](#4:8)).

### 4:6 
A team is allowed to use a maximum of 4 team officials during the
game, but only 2 of them may remain in the substitution area. The
other 2 shall remain behind the substitution area outside of the safety
zone but in case of a player’s injury, after the referee’s permission,
they may proceed to the spot for assistance in accordance with Rule [4:7](#4:7).

These team officials may not be replaced during the course of the
game. One of them must be designated as the “responsible team
official“. Only this official is allowed to address the
timekeeper/scorekeeper and possibly the referees (except as
mentioned in Rule [2:17](#2:17)).

A team official is general not allowed to enter the court during the
game. A violation of this rule is to be penalized as unsportsmanlike
conduct (Rules [8:4](#8:4), [16:1d](#16:1), [16:2d](#16:2) and [16:6b](#16:6)). The game is restarted
with a free throw for the opponents (Rule [13:1a-b](#13:1), [Clarification No. 8](#8.-interruption-by-the-timekeeper)).

### 4:7 
In cases of an injury, the referees may give permission (through hand
signal No. 15) for two of the persons who are “entitled to participate“
(see Rule [4:4](#4:4)) to enter the court during a time-out ([Hand Signal No.
14](#14---time-out)), for the specific purpose of assisting the injured player (Rule [16:2d](#16:2)).

If additional persons enter the court after two persons have already
entered, this shall be punished as an illegal entry, in the case of a player under Rule [4:14](#4:14) and [16:2a](#16:2), and in the case of a team official
under Rule [4](#4), [16:2h](#16:2) and [16:6a](#16:6). A person, who has been permitted to
enter the court but, instead of assisting the injured player, gives
instructions to players, approaches opponents or referees etc., shall
be considered guilty of unsportsmanlike conduct.

## Equipment

### 4:8
All the court players of a team must wear identical uniforms. The
combinations of colours and design for the two teams must be clearly
distinguishable from each other.

The Beach Handball male player’s uniform consists of tank top and
shorts and eventual accessories. The Beach Handball female player’s
uniform consists of tops and bikini bottoms and eventual accessories. 

Tank tops / tops will be of (at least 80% solid) bright and light colours
(i.e. red, blue, yellow, green, orange and white) in the attempt to
reflect the colours usually used and worn on the beach.

A player who is entering the playing court as a goalkeeper must wear
identical (in design and player’s number) uniform with his teammates
but in colours that distinguish him from the court players of both
teams and the goalkeepers of the opposing team (Rule [17:3](#17:3)).

***Comment:***
The team officials must wear identical shirts in different colour than the
shirts of their own team players and the players of the opposing team. All
4 team officials present at the court during their team’s game must be
exactly in the same uniform.

### 4:9 
The athlete’s number (of approx. 12x10 centimetres for the men’s
tank tops and 8x6 centimetres for the women’s tops) must be placed
on the front and back of the men’s tank tops and the women’s top.
This information must be printed in a contrasting colour to that of the
tank top/top (i.e. light on a dark tank top/top, dark on a light tank
top/top).

### 4:10
All players play barefoot.

It is permitted to wear regular (cloth made) sport socks or support
bandages. All other types of footwear (synthetic, rubber etc.) are not
permitted.

### 4:11
It is not permitted to wear objects that could be dangerous to the
players. This includes, for instance, head protection, face masks,
bracelets, watches, rings, necklaces or chains, ear-rings, glasses
without restraining bands or with solid frames, orthopaedic aids with
hard plastic or metal parts, or any other objects that could be
dangerous (Rule [17:3](#17:3)).

Athletes are authorized to use the following accessories:
- Cap or hat (with soft visor or hard visor turned to the back in order to
avoid injuries), head band or bandana.

- Sunglasses (plastic with restraining bands).

- Therapeutic support braces (or bandages) for knee/elbow/foot.

***Comment 1:***
Caps or hats, headbands or bandanas used by a team’s athletes should be
of the same colour. The same stands for any headgear used by the team’s officials.

Athletes are responsible for their own accessories. Players, who do not
meet the previous requirements, will not be allowed to take part in the game
until they have corrected the problem.

***Comment 2:***
Nose protector: The rule states that it is not permitted to wear a head
protection or a face mask. This rule has to be interpreted as follows: A
mask covers the major part of the face. A nose protector is much smaller in
size and covers only the nose area. Therefore, it is permitted to wear a
nose protection.

### 4:12 
If a player is bleeding or has blood on the body or uniform, the player
must leave the court immediately and voluntarily (through a normal
substitution) in order to have the bleeding stopped, the wound
covered, and the body and the uniform cleaned off. The player must
not return to the court until this has been done.

A player who does not follow the instructions of the referees in
connection with this provision is deemed guilty of unsportsmanlike
conduct (Rules [8:4](#8:4), [16:1d](#16:1) and [16:2c](#16:2)).

## Player substitutions

### 4:13 
Substitutes may enter the game, at any time and repeatedly, without
notifying the timekeeper/scorekeeper, as long as the players they are
replacing have already left the court (Rule [16:2a](#16:2)).

The players shall always enter the court over their own team’s
substitution line (Rule [16:2a](#16:2)). These requirements also apply to the
substitution of goalkeepers (Rule [5:12](#5:12)).

The substitution rules apply also during a time-out (except team timeout).

In case of a faulty substitution the game is restarted with a free throw
(Rule [13](#13)) or a 6-metre throw (Rule [14](#14)) for the opponents, if the game
has to be interrupted. Otherwise the game is restarted with the throw
that corresponds to the situation.

The guilty player shall be penalized with a suspension (Rule [16](#16)). If more than one player from the same team is guilty of faulty of substitution in the same situation, only the first player committing an
infraction is to be penalized.

### 4:14 
If an additional player enters the court without a substitution, or if a
player illegally interferes with the game from the substitution area,
there shall be a suspension for the player. Thus the team must be
reduced by one player on the court.

If a player enters the court while serving a suspension, he shall be
given an additional suspension that starts immediately and also
causes a disqualification of the player.

If the opposing team was in possession of the ball at the time of the
entry, then the team is correspondingly further reduced on the court. If
the team of the suspended player was in possession of the ball at the
time of the entry, then the team must be reduced by one player on the
court.

The game is in both cases restarted with a free throw for the
opponents (Rule [13:1a-b](#13:1); see, however, [Clarification No. 8](#8.-interruption-by-the-timekeeper)).