# The Goal Area

### 6:1
Only the goalkeeper is allowed to enter the goal area (see, however, [6:3](#6:3)). The goal area,
which includes the goal-area line, is considered entered when a court player touches it
with any part of the body.

### 6:2
When a court player enters the goal area, the decisions shall be as follows:

- a) Goalkeeper throw when a player of the team in possession enters the goal area in
  possession of the ball or enters without the ball but gains an advantage by doing so
  ([12:1a](#12:1));

- b) Free throw, when a court player of the team in defence enters the
goal area and gains an advantage but without destroying a chance of
scoring (Rule [13:1a-b](#13:1));

- c) 6-metre throw, when a defending player enters the goal area and,
because of this, destroys a clear chance of scoring (Rule [14:1a](#14:1)).


### 6:3
Entering the goal area is not penalised when:

- a) A player enters the goal area after playing the ball, as long as this
does not create a disadvantage for the opponents;

- b) A player enters the goal area without the ball and does not gain an
advantage by doing so;

- c) A defending player enters the goal area during or after an attempt
to defend, without causing a disadvantage for the opponents.

### 6:4
The ball belongs to the goalkeeper when it is in the goal area (see,
however, Rule [6:5](#6:5)).

### 6:5
The ball may always be played when it is at rest or rolling, even in the
goal area.

However, the court players are not allowed to enter the goal area to
do so (free throw).

It is allowed to play the ball which is in the air above the goal area,
except in case of a goalkeeper throw (Rule [12:2](#12:2)).

### 6:6
The goalkeeper shall put the ball back into play through a goalkeeper
throw (Rule [12](#12)), when it ends up in the goal area.

### 6:7
Play shall continue (through a goalkeeper throw under Rule [6:6](#6:6)) if a
player of the defending team touches the ball when in the act of
defence, and the ball is caught by the goalkeeper or comes to rest in
the goal area.

### 6:8
If a player plays the ball into his own goal area, the decisions shall be
as follows:
- a) Goal, if the ball enters the goal;

- b) Free throw, if the ball comes to a rest in the goal area, or if the
goalkeeper touches the ball and it does not enter the goal (Rule
[13:1a-b](#13:1));

- c) Throw-in, if the ball goes out over the outer goal line (Rule [12:1](#12:1));

- d) Play continues, if the ball passes through the goal area back into
the playing area, without being touched by the goalkeeper.

### 6:9
A ball that returns from the goal area out into the playing area remains
in play.
