# Playing the Ball, Passive Play

## Playing the Ball

**It is *permitted* to:**

### 7:1
Throw, catch, stop, push or hit the ball, by using hands (open or
closed), arms, head, torso, thighs and knees.
Diving for the ball when it is lying or rolling on the sand is also
permitted.

### 7:2
Hold the ball for a maximum of 3 seconds, also when it is lying on the
sand (Rule [13:1a](#13:1)).
The ball may not remain on the sand longer than 3 seconds and then
be picked up again by the same player who last touched it (free
throw).

### 7:3
Take a maximum of 3 steps with the ball (Rule [13:1a](#13:1)); one step is
considered taken when:
- a) A player who is standing with both feet on the sand lifts one foot
and puts it down again, or moves one foot from one place to
another;

- b) A player is touching the sand with one foot only, catches the ball
and then touches the sand with the other foot;

- c) A player after a jump touches the sand with one foot only, and
then hops on the same foot or touches the sand with the other
foot;

- d) A player after a jump touches the sand with both feet
simultaneously, and then lifts one foot and puts it down again, or
moves one foot from one place to another.

***Comment:***

It counts as only one step, if one foot is moved from one place to another,
and then the other foot is dragged next to the first one.

### 7:4
While standing or running:

- a) Bounce the ball once and catch it again with one or both hands;

- b) Bounce the ball repeatedly with one hand (dribble), or roll the ball
on the sand repeatedly with one hand, and then catch it or pick it
up again with one or both hands.

As soon as the ball thereafter is held in one or both hands, it must be
played within 3 seconds or after no more than 3 steps (Rule [13:1a](#13:1)).

The bouncing or dribbling is considered to have started when the
player touches the ball with any part of his body and directs it towards
the sand.

After the ball has touched another player or the goal, the player is
allowed to tap the ball or bounce it and catch it again.

  
### 7:5
Move the ball from one hand into the other one.

### 7:6
Play the ball while kneeling, sitting or lying on the sand.


**It is *not permitted* to:**

### 7:7
Touch the ball more than once, unless it has touched the sand,
another player or the goal in the meantime (Rule [13:1a](#13:1)).

Fumbling the ball is not penalized.

***Comment:***

Fumbling means that a player fails to control the ball when trying to catch it
or stop it.

If the ball has already been controlled, then the player may not touch it
more than once after tapping or bouncing it.

### 7:8
Touch the ball with a foot or leg below the knee, except when the ball
has been thrown at the player by an opponent (Rule [13:1a-b](#13:1)).

### 7:9
Play continues if the ball touches a referee on the court.

## Passive Play

### 7:10
It is not permitted to keep the ball in the team’s possession without
making any recognizable attempt to attack or to shoot on goal (see
[Clarification No. 4](#4.-passive-play)). This is regarded as passive play, which is to be
penalized with a free throw against the team in possession of the ball
(Rule [13:1a](#13:1)).

The free throw is taken from the spot where the ball was when play
was interrupted.


### 7:11
When a possible tendency to passive play is recognized, the
forewarning signal ([Hand Signal No. 16](#16---forewarning-signal-for-passive-play)) is shown. This gives the
team in possession of the ball the opportunity to change its way of
attacking in order to avoid losing possession. If the way of attacking
does not change after the forewarning signal has been shown or no
shot on goal is taken, then a free throw is called against the team in
possession (see [Clarification No. 4](#4.-passive-play)).

In certain situations the referees can call free throw against the team
in possession also without any prior forewarning signal (e.g. when a
player intentionally refrains from trying to utilize a clear scoring
chance).