# Fouls and Unsportsmanlike Conduct

**It is *permitted:***

## 8:1

- a) Use arms and hands to block or gain possession of the ball;

- b) Use an open hand to play the ball away from the opponent from
any direction;

- c) Use the body to obstruct an opponent, even when the opponent is
not in possession of the ball;

- d) Make body contact with an opponent, when facing him and with
bent arms, and maintain this contact in order to monitor and follow
the opponent.

**It is not *permitted:***

### 8:2

- a) Pull or hit the ball out of the hands of an opponent;

- b) Block or force away an opponent with arms, hands or legs;

- c) Restrain, hold, push, run or jump into an opponent;

- d) Interfere with, impede or endanger an opponent (with or without
the ball) in contravention of the rules.

### 8:3
Violations of Rule [8:2](#8:2) where the action is mainly or exclusively
directed at the opponent and not at the ball are to be punished
progressively. Progressive punishment means that it is not sufficient
to penalize a particular foul solely with a free throw or 6-metre throw,
because the foul goes beyond the type of infraction which normally
occurs in the struggle for the ball.

Each infraction that meets the definition for progressive punishment
requires a personal punishment.
  
### 8:4 
Physical and verbal expressions that are incompatible with the spirit of
good sportsmanship are regarded as constituting unsportsmanlike
conduct (for examples, see [Clarification No. 5](#5.-unsportsmanlike-conduct)). This applies to both
players and team officials, on or outside the playing court. Progressive
31
punishment also applies in the case of unsportsmanlike conduct
(Rules [16:1d](#16:1), [16:2](#16:2), [16:6](#16:6)).

### 8:5
A player who endangers the opponent’s health when attacking him,
shall be disqualified (Rule [16:6c](#16:6)), particularly if he:
- a) From the side or from behind, either strikes or pulls back the
throwing arm of a player who is in the process of throwing or
passing the ball;

- b) Takes any action resulting in the opponent being struck on the
head or neck;

- c) Deliberately hits the body of an opponent with his foot or knee or
in any other way, including tripping;

- d) Pushes an opponent who is running or jumping, or attacks him in
such a way that the opponent loses control of his body; this also
applies when a goalkeeper leaves his goal area in connection with
a counter-attack from the opponents;

- e) Hits a defending player in the head with a free throw taken as a
direct shot on goal, assuming that the defending player was not
moving; or similarly, hits the goalkeeper in the head with a 6-metre
throw, assuming that the goalkeeper was not moving.


***Comment:***

Even a foul with a very small physical impact can be very dangerous and
have potentially very serious consequences, if the timing of the foul is such
that the opponent is defenceless and caught unaware. It is the risk to the
player and not the seemingly minor nature of the body contact that should
be guiding in determining the appropriateness of a disqualification.

### 8:6
Seriously unsportsmanlike conduct by a player or team official, on or
outside the court (for examples, see [Clarification No. 6](#6.-seriously-unsportsmanlike-conduct)), shall be
punished with disqualification (Rule [16:6e](#16:6)).

### 8:7
A player who is guilty of “assault” during the playing time shall be
disqualified what has also to be reported in writing. Assault outside 
the playing time leads to a disqualification (Rules [16:6f](#16:6); [16:16b-d](#16:16)). A
team official who is guilty of assault shall be disqualified (Rule [16:6g](#16:6)).

***Comment:***
Assault is, for the purposes of this rule, defined as a forceful and deliberate
attack against the body of another person (player, referee,
timekeeper/scorekeeper, team official, delegate, spectator, etc). In other
words, it is not simply a reflex action or the result of careless and excessive
methods. Spitting on another person is specifically regarded as assault.

### 8:8
Violations against Rules [8:2-7](#8:2) lead to a 6-metre throw for the
opponents (Rule [14:1](#14:1)), if the violation directly, or indirectly because of
the interruption it causes, destroys a clear chance of scoring for the
opponents.

Otherwise the violation leads to a free throw for the opponents (Rules [13:1a-b](#13:1), but see also Rules [13:2](#13:2) and [13:3](#13:3)).

Disqualification due to a particularly reckless, particularly dangerous,
premeditated or malicious action has also to be reported in writing.

### 8:9
If the referees find an action to be particularly reckless, particularly
dangerous, premeditated or malicious, they must submit a written
report after the game, so that the responsible authorities are in a
position to take a decision about further measures.

Indications and characteristics that could serve as decision-making criteria in addition to those in Rule [8:5](#8:5) are:
- a) A particularly reckless or particularly dangerous action;

- b) A premeditated or malicious action, which is not in any way related
to the game situation.

Disqualification due to extremely unsportsmanlike conduct has also to
be reported in writing.

### 8:10
If the referees classify a conduct as extremely unsportsmanlike, they
must submit a written report after the game, so that the responsible
authorities are in a position to take a decision about further measures.
33
The following actions may serve as examples:
- a) Insulting or threatening behaviour directed at another person, e.g., referee, timekeeper/scorekeeper, delegate, team official, player, spectator; the behaviour may be in verbal or non-verbal form (e.g. facial expression, gestures, body language or body contact);

- b) (I) The interference by a team official in the game, on the playing court or from the substitution area, or (II) A player destroying a clear chance of scoring, either through an illegal entry on the court (Rule [4:14](#4:14)) or from the substitution area;

- c) If during the last minute of a game the ball is out of play, and a player or team official prevents or delays the execution of a throw for the opponents, in order to prevent them from being able to take a shot on goal or to obtain a clear scoring chance; this is considered extremely unsportsmanlike, and it applies to any type of interference
(e.g., with only limited physical action, intercepting a pass,
interference with the reception of the ball, not releasing the ball);

- d) If during the last minute of a game the ball is in play, and the
opponents, through an action falling under rule [8:5](#8:5) or [8:6](#8:6), prevent the
team in possession from being able to take a shot on goal or to obtain
a clear scoring chance; this is not just to be punished with a
disqualification under 8:5 or 8:6; a written report must also be
submitted.