# The Throw-Off

### 10:1
At the start of the game, the throw-off is taken by the team that wins the coin toss and
elects to start with the ball in its possession. The opponents then have the right to
choose ends. Alternatively, if the team that wins the coin toss prefers to choose ends,
then the opponents take the throw-off.

The teams change ends for the second half of the game. The throw-off at the start of the
second half is taken by the team that did not have the throw-off at the start of the game.

A new coin toss is undertaken prior to each overtime period, and all the above-stated
regulations under Rule 10:1 also apply to overtime.

### 10:2
After a goal has been scored play is resumed with a throw-off taken by the team that
conceded the goal (see, however, 9:2, 2nd paragraph).

### 10:3
The throw-off is taken in any direction from the centre of the court (with a tolerance
sideways of about 1.5 metres). It is preceded by a whistle signal, following which it
must be taken within 3 seconds (13:1a, 15:7 3rd paragraph). The player taking the
throw-off must take up a position with at least one foot on the centre line, and the other
foot on or behind the line (15:6), and remain in this position until the ball has left his
hand (13:1a, 15:7 3rd paragraph) (see also Clarification No. 5).

The teammates of the thrower are not allowed to cross the centre line prior to the
whistle signal (15:6).

### 10:4
For the throw-off at the start of each half (incl. any period of overtime), all players must
be in their own half of the court.

However, for the throw-off after a goal has been scored, the opponents of the thrower
are allowed to be in both halves of the court.

In both cases, however, the opponents must be at least 3 metres away from the player
taking the throw-off (15:4, 15:9, 8:7c).
