# The Goalkeeper Throw

### 12:1
A goalkeeper throw is awarded when: (I) a player of the opposing team has entered the
goal area in violation of Rule 6:2a; (II) the goalkeeper has controlled the ball in the goal
area or the ball is stationary on the floor in the goal area (6:4-5); (III) a player of the
opposing team has touched the ball when it is rolling on the floor in the goal area (6:5,
1st paragraph) or (IV) when the ball has crossed the outer goal line, after having been
touched last by the goalkeeper or a player of the opposing team.

This means that in all these situations the ball is considered out of play, and that the
game is resumed with a goalkeeper throw (13:3) if there is a violation after a goalkeeper
throw has been awarded and before it has been executed.

### 12:2
The goalkeeper throw is taken by the goalkeeper without whistle signal from the referee
(see, however, 15:5b), from the goal area out over the goal area line.

If the team that has to execute the goalkeeper throw is playing without a goalkeeper, a
goalkeeper must replace one of the court players (Rule 4:4). The referees decide if a
time-out is necessary (Rule 2:8, 2nd paragraph, Clarification No. 2).

The goalkeeper throw is considered to have been taken, when the ball thrown by the
goalkeeper has completely crossed the goal-area line.

The players of the other team are allowed to be immediately outside the goal-area line,
but they are not allowed to touch the ball until it has completely crossed the line (15:4,
15:9, 8:7c).
