# The 7-Metre Throw

## 7-Metre Decision

### 14:1
A 7-metre throw is awarded when:

- a) a clear chance of scoring is illegally destroyed anywhere on the court by a player or a
  team official of the opposing team;
- b) there is an unwarranted whistle signal at the time of a clear chance of scoring;
- c) a clear chance of scoring is destroyed through the interference of someone not
  participating in the game, for instance a spectator entering the court or stopping the
  players through a whistle signal (except when 9:1 Comment applies).
- d) there is an infraction according to Rules 8:10c or 8:10d (however, see 8:10 last
  paragraph).

By analogy, this rule also applies in the case of a ‘force majeure’, such as a sudden
electrical failure, that stops the game precisely during a clear chance of scoring.
See Clarification No. 6 for the definition of clear chance of scoring.

### 14:2
If an attacking player retains full control of ball and body despite a violation as in Rule
14:1a, there is no reason to give a 7-metre throw, even if thereafter the player fails to
utilise the clear scoring chance.

Whenever there is a potential 7-metre decision, the referees should always hold off on
intervening until they can clearly determine if a 7-metre decision is indeed justified and
necessary. If the attacking player scores a goal despite the illegal interference from the
defenders, then there is obviously no reason to give a 7-metre throw. Conversely, if it
becomes apparent that the player really has lost ball or body control because of the
violation, so that a clear chance no longer exists, then a 7-metre throw is to be given.

Rule 14:2 is not applicable in cases involving infractions of the Rules 4:2-3 or 4:5-6,
when the game has to be interrupted immediately by a signal from the timekeeper, the
delegate or the referees.

### 14:3
When awarding a 7-metre throw the referees may give a time-out, but only if there is a
substantial delay, for instance due to a substitution of the goalkeeper or the thrower, and
a time-out decision would be in line with the principles and criteria stated in
Clarification No. 2.

## 7-Metre Execution

### 14:4
The 7-metre throw is to be taken as a shot on goal, within 3 seconds after a whistle
signal from the referee (15:7, 3rd paragraph; 13:1a).

### 14:5
The player who is taking the 7-metre throw must take up a position behind the 7-metre
line, not further away than 1 metre behind the line (15:1, 15:6). After the whistle signal
from the referee, the thrower must not touch or cross the 7-metre line before the ball has
left his hand (15:7, 3rd paragraph; 13:1a).

### 14:6
The ball must not be played again by the thrower or a teammate following the execution
of a 7-metre throw, until it has touched an opponent or the goal (15:7, 3rd paragraph;
13:1a).

### 14:7
When a 7-metre throw is being executed, the teammates of the thrower must position
themselves outside the free throw line, and remain there until the ball has left the
thrower’s hand (15:3, 15:6). If they do not do so, a free throw will be called against the
team taking the 7-metre throw (15:7, 3rd paragraph; 13:1a).

### 14:8
When a 7-metre throw is being executed, the players of the opposing team must remain
outside the free throw line and at least 3 metres away from the 7-metre line, until the
ball has left the thrower’s hand. If they do not do so, the 7-metre throw will be retaken if
it does not result in a goal, but there is no personal punishment.

### 14:9
The 7-metre throw is to be retaken, unless a goal is scored, if the goalkeeper crosses his
restraining line, i.e. the 4-metre line (1:7, 5:11), before the ball has left the thrower’s
hand. However, it does not result in a personal punishment for the goalkeeper.

### 14:10
It is not permitted to change goalkeepers once the thrower is ready to take the 7-metre
throw, standing in the correct position with the ball in hand. Any attempt to make a
substitution in this situation is to be penalised as unsportsmanlike conduct (8:7c, 16:1b
and 16:3d).
