# General Instructions for the Execution of the Throws (Throw-Off, ThrowIn, Goalkeeper Throw, Free throw and 7-Metre Throw)

## The Thrower

### 15:1
Prior to the execution, the thrower must be in the correct position prescribed for the
throw. The ball must be in the hand of the thrower (15:6).

During the execution, except in the case of the goalkeeper throw, the thrower must have
one part of a foot in constant contact with the floor until the ball is released. The other
foot may be lifted and put down repeatedly (see also Rule 7:6).

The thrower must remain in the correct position until the throw has been executed
(15:7, 2nd and 3rd paragraph).

### 15:2
A throw is considered taken when the ball has left the hand of the thrower (see,
however, 12:2).

The thrower must not touch the ball again until it has touched another player or the goal.
(15:7, 15:8). See also further restrictions for situations under 14:6.

A goal may be scored directly from any throw, except that a direct ‘own goal’ cannot be
scored through a goalkeeper throw (i.e., by dropping the ball into one’s own goal).

## The Teammates of the Thrower

### 15:3
The teammates must take up the positions prescribed for the throw in question (15:6).
The players must remain in correct positions until the ball has left the hand of the
thrower, except as under 10:3, 2nd paragraph.

The ball must not be touched by, or handed over to, a teammate during the execution
(15:7, 2nd and 3rd paragraph).

## The Defending Players

### 15:4
The defending players must take up the positions prescribed for the throw and remain in
correct position until the ball has left the hand of the thrower (15:9).

Incorrect positions on the part of the defending players in connection with the execution
of a throw-off, throw-in, or free throw must not be corrected by the referees if the
attacking players are not at a disadvantage by taking the throw immediately. If there is a
disadvantage, then the positions are to be corrected.

## Whistle Signal for the Restart

### 15:5
The referee must blow the whistle for the restart:

- a) always in the case of a throw-off (10:3) or 7-metre throw (14:4);
- b) in the case of a throw-in, goalkeeper throw or free throw:
  - for a restart after a time-out;
  - for a restart with a free throw under Rule 13:4;
  - when there has been a delay in the execution;
  - after a correction of the player positions;
  - after a verbal caution or a warning.

The referee may judge it appropriate, for the sake of clarity, to blow the whistle for the
restart on any other occasion.

In principle, the referee shall not give the whistle signal for the restart unless and until
the requirements for player positions under 15:1, 15:3 and 15:4 are met (see, however,
13:7 2nd paragraph and 15:4 2nd paragraph). If the referee blows his whistle for a throw
to be taken, despite incorrect positions on the part of players, then those players are
fully entitled to intervene.

After the whistle signal the thrower must play the ball within 3 seconds.

## Sanctions

### 15:6
Violations by the thrower or his teammates prior to the execution of a throw, i.e.,
typically in the form of incorrect positions or the touching of the ball by a teammate,
shall lead to a correction. (See, however, 13:7 2nd paragraph).

### 15:7
The consequences of violations by the thrower or his teammates (15:1-3) during the
execution of a throw depend primarily on whether the execution was preceded by a
whistle signal for the restart.

In principle, any violation during an execution that was not preceded by a restart signal
is to be handled through a correction and a retaking of the throw after a whistle signal.
However, an advantage concept, in analogy with Rule 13:2, applies here. If the
thrower’s team immediately loses possession after an incorrect execution, then the
throw is simply considered to have been executed and play continues.

In principle, any violation during an execution after a restart signal is to be penalised.
This applies, for instance, if the thrower jumps during the execution, holds on to the ball
for more than 3 seconds, or moves out of the correct position before the ball has left his
hand. It applies if the teammates move into illegal positions after the whistle signal but
before the ball has left the thrower’s hands (except 10:3, 2nd paragraph). In such cases,
the initial throw is forfeited, and the opponents are awarded a free throw (13:1a) from
the place of the infraction (see, however, Rule 2:6). The advantage provision under Rule
13:2 does apply, i.e., if the thrower’s team loses possession of the ball before the
referees have an opportunity to intervene, play continues.

### 15:8
In principle, any violation immediately following, but related to, the execution of a
throw is to be penalised. This refers to a violation of 15:2, 2nd paragraph, i.e., the
thrower touches the ball a second time before it has touched another player or the goal.
It can take the form of a dribble, or grabbing the ball again after it is in the air or has
been put down on the floor. This is sanctioned with a free throw (13:1a) for the
opponents. As in the case of 15:7 3rd paragraph, the advantage provision applies.

### 15:9
Except as indicated in Rules 14:8, 14:9, 15:4 2nd paragraph and 15:5 3rd paragraph,
defending players who interfere with the execution of a throw for the opponents, for
instance by not taking up a correct position initially or by moving into an incorrect
position subsequently, shall be penalised. This applies regardless of whether it happens
prior to the execution or during the execution (before the ball has left the thrower’s
hand).

It also applies whether the throw was preceded by a whistle signal for the restart or not.
Rule 8:7c applies, in conjunction with Rules 16:1b and 16:3d.

A throw that was negatively affected by a defender’s interference shall, in principle, be
repeated.
