# The Free Throw

## Free-Throw Decision

### 13:1
In principle, the referees interrupt the game and have it restarted with a free throw for
the opponents when:

- a) the team in possession of the ball commits a violation of rules that must lead to a loss
  of possession (see 4:2-3, 4:5-6, 5:6-10, 6:5 1st paragraph, 6:7b, 7:2-4, 7:7-8, 7:10,
  7:11-12, 8:2-10, 10:3, 11:4, 13:7, 14:4-7, 15:7 3rd paragraph, and 15:8);
- b) the opponents commit a violation of rules that causes the team in possession of the ball
  to lose it (see 4:2-3, 4:5-6, 5:5, 6:2b, 6:7b, 7:8, 8:2-10).

### 13:2
The referees should allow continuity in the game by refraining from interrupting the
game prematurely with a free-throw decision.

This means that, under Rule 13:1a, the referees should not call a free throw if the
defending team gains possession of the ball immediately after the violation committed
by the attacking team.

Similarly, under Rule 13:1b, the referees should not intervene until and unless it is clear
that the attacking team has lost possession of the ball or is unable to continue their
attack, due to the violation committed by the defending team.

If a personal punishment is to be given because of rules violation, then the referees may
decide to interrupt the game immediately, if this does not cause a disadvantage for the
opponents of the team committing the violation. Otherwise the punishment should be
delayed until the existing situation is over.

Rule 13:2 does not apply in the case of infringements against Rules 4:2-3 or 4:5-6,
where the game shall be interrupted immediately, normally through the intervention of
the timekeeper, the delegate or the referees.

### 13:3
If a violation that would normally lead to a free throw under Rule 13:1a-b takes place
when the ball is out of play, then the game is restarted with the throw that corresponds
to the reason for the existing interruption (*please see also Rules 8:10c, special
instructions during the last 30 seconds of the game*).

### 13:4
In addition to the situations indicated in Rule 13:1a-b, a free throw is also used as the
way of restarting the game in certain situations where the game is interrupted (i.e. when
the ball is in play), even though no violation of rules has occurred:

- a) if one team is in possession of the ball at the time of the interruption, this team shall
  retain possession;
- b) if neither team is in possession of the ball, then the team that last had possession shall
  be given possession again.
  
### 13:5
If there is a free-throw decision against the team that is in possession of the ball when
the referee whistles, then the player who has the ball at that moment must immediately
drop it or put it down on the floor, so that it can be played (8:8b).

## Free-Throw Execution

### 13:6
The free throw is normally taken without any whistle signal from the referee (see,
however, 15:5b) and, in principle, from the place where the infraction occurred.
The following are exceptions to this principle:

In the situations described under 13:4a-b, the free throw is taken, after whistle signal, in
principle from the place where the ball was at the time of the interruption.

If a referee or delegate (of the IHF or a continental confederation/national federation)
interrupts the game because of an infringement on the part of a player or team official of
the defending team, and this results in a verbal caution or a personal punishment, then
the free-throw should be taken from the place where the ball was when the game was
interrupted, if this is a more favourable location than the position where the
infringement took place.

The same exception as in the previous paragraph applies if a timekeeper interrupts the
game because of violations under Rules 4:2-3 or 4:5-6.

As indicated in Rule 7:11, free throws called because of passive play shall be taken
from the place where the ball was when the game was interrupted.

Notwithstanding the basic principles and procedures stated in the preceding paragraphs,
a free throw can never be taken inside the throwing team’s own goal area or inside the
free throw line of the opponents. In any situation where the location indicated by the
one of the preceding paragraphs involves either one of these areas, the location for the
execution must be moved to the nearest spot immediately outside the restricted area.

***Comment:***

*If the correct position for the free throw is at the free throw line of the defending team, then
the execution must take place essentially at the precise spot. However, the further away the
location is from the defending team’s free throw line, the more of a margin there is for
allowing the free throw to be taken a short distance away from the precise spot. This margin
gradually increases up to 3 metres, which applies in the case of a free throw taken from just
outside the throwing team’s own goal area.*

*The margin just explained does not apply following a violation of Rule 13:5, if this violation is
being punished in accordance with Rule 8:8b. In such cases, the execution should always be
from the precise spot where the violation has been committed.*

### 13:7
Players of the throwing team must not touch or cross the free throw line of the
opponents before the free throw has been taken. See also the special restriction under
Rule 2:5.

The referees must correct the positions of players of the throwing team who are between
the free throw line and the goal-area line prior to the execution of the free throw, if the
incorrect positions have an influence on the game (15:3, 15:6). The free throw shall
then be taken following a whistle signal (15:5b). The same procedure applies (Rule
15:7, 2nd paragraph) if players of the throwing team enter the restricted area during the
execution of the free throw (before the ball has left the thrower’s hand), if the execution
of the throw was not preceded by a whistle signal.

In the case where the execution of a free throw has been authorised through a whistle
signal, if players from the attacking team touch or cross the free throw line before the
ball has left the hand of the thrower, there shall be a free throw awarded to the
defending team (15:7, 3rd paragraph; 13:1a).

### 13:8
When a free throw is being taken, the opponents must remain at a distance of at least 3
metres from the thrower. They are, however, allowed to stand immediately outside their
goal-area line if the free throw is being taken at their free throw line. Interference with
the execution of the free throw is penalised in accordance with Rules 15:9 and 8:7c.
