# The Punishments

## Warning

### 16:1
A warning is the appropriate punishment for:

- a) fouls that are to be punished progressively (8:3; compare however 16:3b and 16:6d);
- b) unsportsmanlike conduct that is to be punished progressively (8:7).

***Comment:***

*A player should not be given more than one warning, and the players of a team should not be
given more than 3 warnings in total; thereafter, the punishment must be at least a 2-minute
suspension.*

*A player who has already had a 2-minute suspension should not subsequently be given a
warning.*

*No more than one warning in total should be given to the officials of a team.*

### 16:2
The referee shall indicate the warning to the guilty player or official and to the
timekeeper/scorekeeper by holding up a yellow card (hand signal no. 13).

## Suspension

### 16:3
A suspension (2 minutes) is the appropriate punishment:

- a) for a faulty substitution, if an additional player enters the court, or if a player interferes
  in the game from the substitution area (4:5-6); note, however, Rule 8:10b (II);
- b) for fouls such as those under 8:3, if the player and/or his team has already received the
  maximum number of warnings (see 16:1 Comment);
- c) for fouls such as those under 8:4;
- d) for unsportsmanlike conduct by a player as under 8:7, if the player and/or his team has
  already received the maximum number of warnings;
- e) for unsportsmanlike conduct by a team official as under 8:7, if one of the officials on
  the team has already received a warning;
- f) for unsportsmanlike conduct by a player or team official as under 8:8 (see also 4:6);
- g) as a consequence of a disqualification of a player or team official (16:8, 2nd
  paragraph; see, however, 16:11b);
- h) for unsportsmanlike conduct by a player before the game has been restarted, after he
  has just been given a 2-minute suspension (16:9a).
  
***Comment:***

*It is not possible to give the officials of a team more than one 2-minute suspension in total.
When a 2-minute suspension is called against a team official in accordance with 16:3e, the
official is allowed to remain in the substitution area and carry out his functions. However, the
team’s strength on the court is reduced for 2 minutes.*

### 16:4
After calling time-out the referee shall clearly indicate the suspension to the guilty
player or team official, and to the timekeeper/scorekeeper, through the prescribed hand
signal, i.e., one arm raised with two fingers extended (hand signal no. 14).

### 16:5
A suspension is always for a playing time of 2 minutes; the third suspension for the
same player also always leads to a disqualification (16:6d).

The suspended player is not allowed to participate in the game during his suspension
time, and the team is not allowed to replace him on the court.

The suspension period begins when the game is restarted with a whistle signal.

A 2-minute suspension carries over to the second half of the game if it has not been
completed by the end of the first half. The same applies from the normal playing time to
overtime and during overtime. An unexpired 2-minute suspension at the end of overtime
means that the player is not entitled to participate in a subsequent tie-breaker through 7-
metre throws in accordance with 2:2 Comment.

## Disqualification

### 16:6
A disqualification is the appropriate punishment:

- a) for fouls under 8:5 and 8:6;
- b) for seriously unsportsmanlike conduct under 8:9 and extremely unsportsmanlike
  conduct under 8:10, by a player or team official, on or outside the court;
- c) for unsportsmanlike conduct by any one of the officials of a team under 8:7, after they
  have collectively already received both a warning and a 2-minute suspension in
  accordance with 16:1b and 16:3e;
- d) as a consequence of a third suspension to the same player (16:5);
- e) for significant or repeated unsportsmanlike conduct during a tie-breaker such as 7-
  metre throwing (2:2 Comment and 16:10).
  
### 16:7
After calling a time-out, the referees shall clearly indicate the disqualification to the
guilty player or team official, and to the timekeeper/scorekeeper, by holding up a red
card (hand signal no. 13, see also Rule 16:8).

## 16:8
A disqualification of a player or team official is always for the entire remainder of the
playing time. The player or official must leave the court and the substitution area
immediately. After leaving, the player or official is not allowed to have any form of
contact with the team.

The disqualification of a player or a team official, on or off the court, during the playing
time, always carries with it a 2-minute suspension for the team. This means that the
team’s strength on the court is reduced by one (16:3f). The reduction on the court will,
however, last for 4 minutes if a player has been disqualified in the circumstances
indicated in Rule 16:9b-d.

A disqualification reduces the number of players, or officials, which is available to the
team (except as in 16:11b). The team is, however, allowed to increase the number of
players on the court again following the expiration of the suspension.

As noted in Rules 8:6 and 8:10a-b, disqualifications in accordance with these rules are
to be reported in writing to the responsible authorities for further action. In such cases,
the ‘responsible team officials’, and the delegate (see Clarification No. 7), shall be
informed immediately after the decision.

For this purpose, the referee also shows the blue card as information after holding up the
red card. 

## More than one violation in the same situation

### 16:9
If a player or team official is guilty of more than one violation simultaneously or in
direct sequence before the game has been restarted and these violations warrant
different punishments, then in principle, only the most severe one of these punishments
shall be given.

There are however the following specific exceptions where in all cases the team must
play at reduced strength on the court for 4 minutes:

- a) if a player who has just been given a 2-minute suspension is guilty of unsportsmanlike
  conduct before the game restarted, then the player is given an additional 2-minute
  suspension (16:3g); if the additional suspension is the player’s third one, then the
  player is to be disqualified;
- b) if a player who has just been given a disqualification (directly or because of a third
  suspension) is guilty of unsportsmanlike conduct before the game is restarted, then the
  team is given a further punishment so that the reduction will be for 4 minutes (16:8,
  2nd paragraph);
- c) if a player who has just been given a 2-minute suspension is guilty of seriously or
  extremely unsportsmanlike conduct before the game is restarted, then the player is
  furthermore disqualified (16:6b); these punishments combined lead to a 4-minute
  reduction (16:8, 2nd paragraph);
- d) if a player who has just been given a disqualification (directly or because of a third
  suspension) is guilty of seriously or extremely unsportsmanlike conduct before the
  game is restarted, then the team is given a further punishment so that the reduction
  will be for 4 minutes (16:8, 2nd paragraph).
  
## Infractions during the playing time

### 16:10
The punishments for actions during the playing time are established in Rules 16:1, 16:3
and 16:6.

In the concept ‘playing time’ all intermissions, time-outs, team time-outs and overtime
periods are included. In all other forms of tie-breakers (e.g., 7-metre throws), only Rule
16:6 applies.

In this way any form of significant or repeated unsportsmanlike conduct will prevent the
further participation of the player concerned (see Rule 2:2 Comment).

## Infractions outside the playing time

### 16:11
Unsportsmanlike conduct, seriously unsportsmanlike conduct, extremely
unsportsmanlike conduct, or any form of particularly reckless actions (see Rules 8:6-10)
on the part of a player or team official, taking place on the premises where a game is
played but outside the playing time, shall be punished as follows:

**Before the game**

- a) a warning shall be given in the case of unsportsmanlike conduct under Rules 8:7-8;
- b) a disqualification of the guilty player or team official shall be given in the case of
  action deemed to fall under Rules 8:6 and 8:10a, but the team is allowed to start with
  14 players and 4 officials; Rule 16:8, 2nd paragraph applies only for violations during
  the playing time; accordingly, the disqualification does not carry with it a 2-minute
  suspension.

Such punishments for violations prior to the game can be implemented at any time during
the game, whenever the guilty person is discovered to be a participant in the game, as this
fact may not be possible to establish yet at the time of the incident.

**After the game**

- c) a written report.
