# The Referees

### 17:1
Two referees with equal authority shall be in charge of each game. They are assisted by
a timekeeper and a scorekeeper.

### 17:2
The referees monitor the conduct of the players and team officials from the moment
they enter the premises until they leave.

### 17:3
The referees are responsible for inspecting the playing court, the goals, and the balls
before the game starts; they decide which balls will be used (1 and 3:1).

The referees also establish the presence of both teams in proper uniforms. They check
the score sheet and the equipment of the players. They ensure that the number of players
and officials in the substitution area is within the limits, and they establish the presence
and identity of the ‘responsible team official’, for each team. Any discrepancies must be
corrected (4:1-2 and 4:7-9).

### 17:4
The coin toss is undertaken by one of the referees in the presence of the other referee
and the ‘responsible team official’ for each team, or a team official or player (for
instance, a team captain) on behalf of the ‘responsible team official’.

### 17:5
In principle, the entire game shall be conducted by the same referees.

It is their responsibility to ensure that the game is played in accordance with the rules,
and they must penalise any infractions (see, however, 13:2 and 14:2).

If one of the referees becomes unable to finish the game, the other referee will continue
the game alone.

***Note:***

*IHF, continental confederations and national federations have the right to apply deviating
regulations in their areas of responsibility, regarding the application of paragraphs 1 and 3
in Rule 17:5.*

### 17:6
If both referees whistle for an infraction and agree about which team should be
penalised but have different opinions as to the severity of the punishment, then the most
severe of the two punishments shall be given.

### 17:7
If both referees whistle for an infraction, or the ball has left the court, and the two
referees show different opinions as to which team should have possession, then the joint
decision that the referees reach after consulting with each other will apply. If they do
not manage to reach a joint decision, then the opinion of the court referee will prevail. 

A time-out is obligatory. Following the consultation between the referees, they give
clear hand signals and the game is restarted after whistle signal (2:8d, 15:5).

### 17:8
Both referees are responsible for keeping the score.
They also take notes about warnings, suspensions and disqualifications.

### 17:9
Both referees are responsible for controlling the playing time. If there is any doubt
about the accuracy of the timekeeping, the referees reach a joint decision (see also 2:3).

***Note:***

*IHF, continental confederations and national federations have the right to apply deviating
regulations in their areas of responsibility, regarding the application of Rules 17:8 and 17:9.*

### 17:10
The referees are responsible for ensuring after the game that the score sheet is
completed correctly.

Disqualifications of the type indicated in Rules 8:6 and 8:10 must be explained in the
match report.

### 17:11 
Decisions made by the referees or the delegates on the basis of their observations of
facts or their judgments are final.

Appeals can be lodged only against decisions that are not in compliance with the rules.
During the game, only the respective ‘responsible team officials’ are entitled to address
the referees.

### 17:12
The referees have the right to suspend a game temporarily or permanently.
Every effort must be made to continue the game, before a decision is taken to suspend it
permanently.

### 17:13
The black uniform is primarily intended for the referees.

### 17:14
The referees and the delegates may use electronic equipment for their internal
communication. The rules for their utilisation are determined by the respective
federation.
