## Playing Time, Final Signal and Time-Out

### Playing time

#### 2:1
The normal playing time for all teams with players of age 16 and above is 2 halves of 30
minutes. The half-time break is normally 10 minutes.

The normal playing time for youth teams is 2 x 25 minutes in age group 12-16 and 2 x
20 minutes in age group 8-12. In both cases the half-time break is normally 10 minutes.

***Note:***

*IHF, continental confederations and national federations have the right to apply deviating
regulations in their areas of responsibility regarding the half-time break. The maximum halftime
break is 15 minutes.*

#### 2:2
Overtime is played, following a 5-minute break, if a game is tied at the end of the
regular playing time and a winner has to be determined. The overtime period consists of
2 halves of 5 minutes, with a 1-minute half-time break.

If the game is again tied after a first overtime period, a second period is played after a 5-
minute break. This overtime period also has 2 halves of 5 minutes, with a 1-minute halftime
break.

If the game is still tied, the winner will be determined in accordance with the rules for
the particular competition. In the case that the decision is to use 7-metre throwing as tiebreaker
to decide a winner, the procedures indicated below shall be followed.

***Comment:***

*If 7-metre throwing is used as a tie-breaker, players who are not suspended or disqualified at
the end of the playing time are entitled to participate (see also Rule [4:1](#4:1), 4th paragraph). Each
team nominates 5 players. These players make one throw each, alternating with the players of
the other team. The teams are not required to predetermine the sequence of their throwers.
Goalkeepers may be freely chosen and substituted among the players eligible to participate.
Players may participate in the 7-metre throwing as both throwers and goalkeepers.*

*The referees decide which goal is used. The referees make a coin toss, and the winning team
chooses whether they wish to throw first or last. The opposite sequence is used for all
subsequent throws, if the throwing has to continue because the score is still tied after the first
five throws each.*

*For such a continuation, each team shall again nominate five players. All or some of them
may be the same as in the first round. This method of nominating five players at a time
continues as long as it is necessary. However, the winner is now decided as soon as there is a
goal difference after both teams have had the same number of throws.*

*Players may be disqualified from further participation in the 7-metre throwing in cases of
significant or repeated unsportsmanlike conduct ([16:6e](#16:6)). If this concerns a player who has
just been nominated in a group of five throwers, the team must nominate another thrower.*

### Final Signal

#### 2:3
The playing time begins with the referee’s whistle for the initial throw-off. It ends with
the automatic final signal from the public clock or from the timekeeper. If no such
signal comes, the referee, the timekeeper or the delegate whistles to indicate that the
playing time is over ([17:9](#17:9)).

***Comment:***

*If a public clock with an automatic final signal is not available, the timekeeper shall use a
table clock or a stopwatch and end the game with a final signal ([18:2](#18:2), 2nd paragraph).*

#### 2:4
Infractions and unsportsmanlike conduct that take place before or simultaneously with
the final signal (for half-time or end of game, and also for the end of the halves in
overtime) are to be punished, also if the resulting free throw (under Rule [13:1](#13:1)) or 7-
metre throw cannot be taken until after the signal.

Similarly, the throw must be retaken, if the final signal (for half-time or end of game,
also in overtime) sounds precisely when a free throw or a 7-metre throw is being
executed or when the ball is already in the air.

In both cases, the referees end the game only after the free throw or 7-metre throw has
been taken (or retaken) and its immediate result has been established.

#### 2:5
For free throws taken (or retaken) under Rule [2:4](#2:4), special restrictions apply regarding
player positions and substitutions. As an exception to the normal substitution flexibility
in Rule [4:4](#4:4), a substitution is allowed for only one player on the attacking team;
similarly, the defending team is allowed to substitute a court player for a goalkeeper if
this team is playing without a goalkeeper when the final signal is given. Violations are
penalised under Rule 4:5, 1st paragraph. Moreover, all the team mates of the thrower
must be positioned at least 3 metres away from the thrower, in addition to being outside
the free throw line of the opponents ([13:7](#13:7), [15:6](#15:6); see also 
[Clarification No. 1](#1.-free-throw-execution-after-the-final-signal-(2:4-6))). The
positions of the defending players are indicated in Rule [13:8](#13:8).

#### 2:6
Players and team officials remain subject to personal punishment for infractions or
unsportsmanlike conduct which take place during the execution of a free throw or 7-
metre throw in the circumstances described in Rules [2:4-5](#2:4). An infraction during the
execution of such a throw cannot, however, lead to a free throw in the opposite
direction.

#### 2:7
If the referees determine that the timekeeper has given the final signal (for half-time or
end of game, also in overtime) too early, they must keep the players on the court and
play the remaining time.

The team that was in possession of the ball at the time of the premature signal will
remain in possession when the game resumes. If the ball was out of play, then the game
is restarted with the throw that corresponds to the situation. If the ball was in play, then
the game is restarted with a free throw in accordance with Rule [13:4a-b](#13:4).

If the first half of a game (or an overtime period) has been terminated too late, the
second half must be shortened correspondingly. If the second half of a game (or an
overtime period) has been terminated too late, then the referees are no longer in a
position to change anything.

### Time Out

#### 2:8
The referees decide on the start and the duration of an interruption (“time-out”).
A time-out is obligatory when:
- a) a 2-minute suspension or disqualification is given;
- b) a team time-out is granted;
- c) there is a whistle signal from the timekeeper or the delegate;
- d) consultation between the referees are necessary in accordance with Rule [17:7](#17:7).
A time-out is normally also given in certain other situations, depending on the
circumstances (see [Clarification No. 2](#2.-time-out-(2:8))).

Infractions during a time-out have the same consequences as infractions during the
playing time ([16:10](#16:10)).

#### 2:9
In principle, the referees decide when the clock is to be stopped and started in
connection with a time-out.

The interruption of the playing time is to be indicated to the timekeeper through three
short blasts on the whistle and [hand signal no. 15](#15---time-out).

However, in the case of obligatory time-outs where the game has been interrupted by a
whistle signal from the timekeeper or Delegate ([2:8b-c](#2:8)), the timekeeper is required to
stop the official clock immediately, without awaiting a confirmation from the referees.
The whistle must always be blown to indicate the restart of the game after a time-out
([15:5b](#15:5)).

***Comment:***
*A whistle signal from the timekeeper/delegate effectively stops the game. Even if the referees
(and the players) do not immediately realise that the game has been stopped, any action on
the court after whistle signal is invalid. This means that if a goal was scored after the whistle
signal from the table, the ‘goal’ must be disallowed. Similarly, a decision to award a throw to
a team (7-metre throw, free throw, throw-in, throw-off or goalkeeper throw) is also invalid.
The game shall instead be restarted in the manner that corresponds to the situation that
existed when the timekeeper/Delegate whistled. (It should be kept in mind that the typical
reason for the intervention is a team time-out or a faulty substitution).*

*However, any personal punishment given by the referees between the time of the whistle from
the timekeeper/delegate and the time the referees stop the action remains valid. This applies
regardless of the type of the violation and regardless of the severity of the punishment.*

#### 2:10
Each team has the right to receive one 1-minute team time-out in each half of the
regular playing time, but not in overtime ([Clarification No. 3](#3.-team-time-out-(2:10))).

***Note:***

*The IHF, continental confederations and national federations have the right to apply
deviating regulations in their areas of responsibility regarding the number of team time-outs,
saying that each team has the right to receive three 1-minute team time-outs per match
(overtime excluded) but may be granted a maximum of two team time-outs in each half of the
regular playing time. (See note in [Clarification No. 3](#3.-team-time-out-(2:10))).*
