# Playing the Ball, Passive Play

## Playing the Ball

**It is *permitted* to:**

### 7:1
throw, catch, stop, push or hit the ball, by using hands (open or closed), arms, head,
torso, thighs, and knees;

### 7:2
hold the ball for a maximum of 3 seconds, also when it is lying on the floor (13:1a);

### 7:3
take a maximum of 3 steps with the ball (13:1a); one step is considered taken when:

- a) a player who is standing with both feet on the floor lifts one foot and puts it down
  again, or moves one foot from one place to another.
- b) a player is touching the floor with one foot only, catches the ball and then touches the
  floor with the other foot.
- c) a player after a jump touches the floor with one foot only, and then hops on the same
  foot or touches the floor with the other foot.
- d) a player after a jump touches the floor with both feet simultaneously, and then lifts one
  foot and puts it down again, or moves one foot from one place to another.

***Comment:***

*If one foot is moved from one place to another and the other foot is dragged behind, only one
step is considered taken.*

*It is in conformance with the rules, if a player with the ball falls to the floor, slides and then
stands up and plays the ball. This is also the case, if a player dives for the ball, controls it and
stands up to play it*

### 7:4
while standing or running:

- a) bounce the ball once and catch it again with one or both hands;
- b) bounce the ball repeatedly with one hand (dribble), and then catch it or pick it up again
  with one or both hands;
- c) roll the ball on the floor repeatedly with one hand, and then catch it or pick it up again
  with one or both hands.

  As soon as the ball thereafter is held in one or both hands, it must be played within 3
  seconds or after no more than 3 steps (13:1a).
  The bouncing or dribbling is considered to have started when the player touches the ball
  with any part of his body and directs it towards the floor.
  
  After the ball has touched another player or the goal, the player is allowed to tap the ball
  or bounce it and catch it again (see, however, 14:6).
  
### 7:5
move the ball from one hand into the other one.

### 7:6
play the ball while kneeling, sitting or lying on the floor; this means that is it permitted
to execute a throw (for instance a free throw), from such a position, if the requirements
of Rule 15:1 are met, including the requirement of having a part of one foot in constant
contact with the floor.

**It is *not permitted* to:**

### 7:7
after the ball has been controlled, to touch it more than once, unless it has touched the
floor, another player, or the goal in the meantime (13:1a); however, touching it more
than once is not penalised, if the player is ‘fumbling’ the ball, i.e., failing to control it
when trying to catch or stop it.

### 7:8
touch the ball with a foot or leg below the knee, except when the ball has been thrown at
the player by an opponent (13:1a-b; see also 8:7e).

### 7:9
Play continues if the ball touches a referee on the court.

### 7:10
If a player with the ball moves outside the playing court with one or both feet (while the
ball is still inside the court), for instance to get around a defending player, this shall lead
to a free throw for the opponents (13:1a).

If a player from the team in possession takes up position outside the court without the
ball, the referees shall indicate to the player that he must move into the court. If the
player does not do so, or if the action is later repeated by the same team, there shall be a
free throw awarded to the opponents (13:1a) without any further forewarning. Such
actions shall not lead to personal punishment under Rules 8 and 16.

## Passive Play

### 7:11
It is not permitted to keep the ball in the team’s possession without making any
recognisable attempt to attack or to shoot on goal. Similarly, it is not allowed to delay
repeatedly the execution of a throw-off, free throw, throw-in, or goalkeeper throw for
one’s own team (see Clarification No. 4). This is regarded as passive play, which is to
be penalised with a free throw against the team in possession of the ball unless the
passive tendency ceases (13:1a).

The free throw is taken from the spot where the ball was when play was interrupted.

### 7:12
When a tendency to passive play is recognised, the forewarning signal (hand signal no.
17) is shown. This gives the team in possession of the ball the opportunity to change its
way of attacking in order to avoid losing possession. If the way of attacking does not
change after the forewarning signal has been shown, the referees can whistle for passive
play at any moment. If no shot on goal is taken by the attacking team after a maximum
of 6 passes, then a free throw is called against this team (13:1a, procedure and
exceptions see Clarification No. 4, section D). 

The decision by the referees about the number of passes is a decision on the basis of
their observation of facts under the principle of Rule 17:11.

In certain situations the referees can call a free throw against the team in possession also
without any prior forewarning signal, e.g. when a player intentionally refrains from
trying to utilise a clear scoring chance.
